.\" $Copyright: $
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 - 2009 by Steve Baker
.\" All Rights reserved
.\"
.\" This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.\" it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
.\" the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or
.\" (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
.\" along with this program; if not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, Inc., 59 Temple Place, Suite 330, Boston, MA  02111-1307  USA
.\"
...
.TH TREE 1 "\*(V)" "Tree 1.5.3"
.SH NAME
tree \- list contents of directories in a tree-like format.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBtree\fP [\fB-adfghilnopqrstuvxACDFNS\fP] [\fB-L\fP \fIlevel\fP [\fB-R\fP]] [\fB-H\fP \fIbaseHREF\fP] [\fB-T\fP \fItitle\fP] [\fB-o\fP \fIfilename\fP] [\fB--nolinks\fP] [\fB-P\fP \fIpattern\fP] [\fB-I\fP \fIpattern\fP] [\fB--inodes\fP] [\fB--device\fP] [\fB--noreport\fP] [\fB--dirsfirst\fP] [\fB--version\fP] [\fB--help\fP] [\fB--filelimit\fP \fI#\fP] [\fIdirectory\fP ...]
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fITree\fP is a recursive directory listing program that produces a depth
indented listing of files, which is colorized ala \fIdircolors\fP if the \fBLS_COLORS\fP
environment variable is set and output is to tty.  With no arguments,
\fItree\fP lists the files in the current directory.  When directory
arguments are given, \fItree\fP lists all the files and/or directories found
in the given directories each in turn.  Upon completion of listing all
files/directories found, \fItree\fP returns the total number of files and/or
directories listed.

By default, when a symbolic link is encountered, the path that the symbolic
link refers to is printed after the name of the link in the format:
.br

    name -> real-path
.br

If the `\fB-l\fP' option is given and the symbolic link refers to an actual
directory, then \fItree\fP will follow the path of the symbolic link as if
it were a real directory.
.br

.SH OPTIONS
\fITree\fP understands the following command line switches:

.TP
.B --help
Outputs a verbose usage listing.
.PP
.TP
.B --version
Outputs the version of tree.
.PP
.TP
.B -a
All files are printed.  By default tree does not print hidden files (those
beginning with a dot `.').  In no event does tree print the file system
constructs `.' (current directory) and `..' (previous directory).
.PP
.TP
.B -d
List directories only.
.PP
.TP
.B -f
Prints the full path prefix for each file.
.PP
.TP
.B -i
Makes tree not print the indentation lines, useful when used in conjunction
with the \fB-f\fP option.
.PP
.TP
.B -l
Follows symbolic links if they point to directories, as if they were
directories. Symbolic links that will result in recursion are avoided when
detected.
.PP
.TP
.B -x
Stay on the current file-system only.  Ala \fBfind \fI-xdev\fP.
.PP
.TP
.B -P \fIpattern\fP
List only those files that match the wild-card \fIpattern\fP.  Note: you must use
the \fI-a\fP option to also consider those files beginning with a dot `.' for
matching.  Valid wildcard operators are `*' (any zero or more characters), `?' (any
single character), `[...]' (any single character listed between brackets (optional -
(dash) for character range may be used: ex: [A-Z]), and `[^...]' (any single character
not listed in brackets) and `|' separates alternate patterns.
.PP
.TP
.B -I \fIpattern\fP
Do not list those files that match the wild-card \fIpattern\fP.
.PP
.TP
.B --noreport
Omits printing of the file and directory report at the end of the tree
listing.
.PP
.TP
.B -p
Print the file type and permissions for each file (as per ls -l).
.PP
.TP
.B -s
Print the size of each file in bytes along with the name.
.PP
.TP
.B -h
Print the size of each file but in a more human readable way, e.g. appending a
size letter for kilobytes (K), megabytes (M), gigabytes (G), terrabytes (T),
petabytes (P) and exabytes (E).
.PP
.TP
.B -u
Print the username, or UID # if no username is available, of the file.
.PP
.TP
.B -g
Print the group name, or GID # if no group name is available, of the file.
.PP
.TP
.B -D
Print the date of the last modification time for the file listed.
.PP
.TP
.B --inodes
Prints the inode number of the file or directory
.PP
.TP
.B --device
Prints the device number to which the file or directory belongs
.PP
.TP
.B -F
Append a `/' for directories, a `=' for socket files, a `*' for executable files
and a `|' for FIFO's, as per ls -F
.PP
.TP
.B -q
Print non-printable characters in filenames as question marks instead of the default
caret notation.
.PP
.TP
.B -N
Print non-printable characters as is instead of the default carrot notation.
.PP
.TP
.B -v
Sort the output by version.
.PP
.TP
.B -r
Sort the output in reverse alphabetic order.
.PP
.TP
.B -t
Sort the output by last modification time instead of alphabetically.
.PP
.TP
.B --dirsfirst
List directories before files.
.PP
.TP
.B -n
Turn colorization off always, over-ridden by the \fB-C\fP option.
.PP
.TP
.B -C
Turn colorization on always, using built-in color defaults if the LS_COLORS
environment variable is not set.  Useful to colorize output to a pipe.
.PP
.TP
.B -A
Turn on ANSI line graphics hack when printing the indentation lines.
.PP
.TP
.B -S
Turn on ASCII line graphics (useful when using linux console mode fonts). This
option is now equivalent to `--charset=IBM437' and will eventually be
depreciated.
.PP
.TP
.B -L \fIlevel\fP
Max display depth of the directory tree.
.PP
.TP
.B --filelimit \fI#\fP
Do not descend directories that contain more than \fI#\fP entries.
.PP
.TP
.B -R
Recursively cross down the tree each \fIlevel\fP directories (see \fB-L\fP
option), and at each of them execute \fBtree\fP again adding `-o 00Tree.html'
as a new option.
.PP
.TP
.B -H \fIbaseHREF\fP
Turn on HTML output, including HTTP references. Useful for ftp sites.
\fIbaseHREF\fP gives the base ftp location when using HTML output. That is, the local
directory may be `/local/ftp/pub', but it must be referenced as
`ftp://hostname.organization.domain/pub' (\fIbaseHREF\fP should be
`ftp://hostname.organization.domain'). Hint: don't use ANSI lines with this option,
and don't give more than one directory in the directory list. If you wish to
use colors via CCS stylesheet, use the -C option in addition to this option
to force color output.
.PP
.TP
.B -T \fItitle\fP
Sets the title and H1 header string in HTML output mode.
.PP
.TP
.B --charset \fIcharset\fP
Set the character set to use when outputting HTML and for line drawing.
.PP
.TP
.B --nolinks
Turns off hyperlinks in HTML output.
.PP
.TP
.B -o \fIfilename\fP
Send output to \fIfilename\fP.
.PP
.br
.SH FILES
/etc/DIR_COLORS		System color database.
.br
~/.dircolors			Users color database.
.br

.SH ENVIRONMENT
\fBLS_COLORS\fP		Color information created by dircolors
.br
\fBTREE_CHARSET\fP	Character set for tree to use in HTML mode.
.br
\fBLC_CTYPE\fP		Locale for filename output.

.SH AUTHOR
Steve Baker (ice@mama.indstate.edu)
.br
HTML output hacked by Francesc Rocher (rocher@econ.udg.es)
.br
Charsets and OS/2 support by Kyosuke Tokoro (NBG01720@nifty.ne.jp)

.SH BUGS
Tree does not prune "empty" directories when the -P and -I options are used.
Tree prints directories as it comes to them, so cannot accumulate information
on files and directories beneath the directory it is printing.

The -h option rounds to the nearest whole number unlike the ls implementation
of -h which rounds up always.  The IEC standard names for powers of 2
cooresponding to metric powers of 10 (KiBi, et al.) are silly.

Pruning files and directories with the -I, -P and --filelimit options will
lead to incorrect file/directory count reports.

Probably more.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dircolors (1L),
.BR ls (1L),
.BR find (1L)
