.TH XvSetPortAttribute 3  "libXv 1.0.4" "X Version 11"
.SH Name
XvSetPortAttribute \- sets an attribute of a video port 
.\"
.SH Syntax
.B #include <X11/extensions/Xvlib.h>
.sp
.nf
.BI "XvSetPortAttribute(Display *" dpy ", XvPortID " port ",
.BI "                   Atom " attribute ", int " value ");"
.fi
.SH Arguments
.\"
.IP \fIdpy\fR 15
Specifies the connection to the X server.
.IP \fIport\fR 15
Specifies the port for which the attribute is to be used.
.IP \fIattribute\fR 15
Identifies the port attribute to be set by this request.
Can be one of the table entries under the column "String," below.
.IP \fIvalue\fR 15
Identifies the value to which \fIattribute\fP is to be set.
Can be one of the table entries under the column "Type," below.
.\"
.SH Description
XvSetPortAttribute(3) permits a client to set the port attribute
to specified values.  This request supports the following values:
.bp
.PP
.\" .TS
.\" tab(@);
.\" lfHB lfHB lfHB
.\" lfR  lfR  lfR .
.\" _
.\" .PP
.\" .sp 4p
.\" Attribute String@Type@Default
.\" .sp 6p
.\" _
.\" .sp 6p
.\" "XV_ENCODING"@XvEncodingID@Server dependent
.\" "XV_HUE"@[-1000...1000]@0
.\" "XV_SATURATION"@[-1000...1000]@0
.\" "XV_BRIGHTNESS"@[-1000...1000]@0
.\" "XV_CONTRAST"@[-1000...1000]@0
.\" .sp 6p
.\" .TE
.nf
Attribute String        Type             Default

"XV_ENCODING"           XvEncodingID     Server dependent
"XV_HUE"                [-1000...1000]   0
"XV_SATURATION"         [-1000...1000]   0
"XV_BRIGHTNESS"         [-1000...1000]   0
"XV_CONTRAST"           [-1000...1000]   0
.fi
.PP
The supplied encoding must be one of the encodings listed for the
adaptor, otherwise an Encoding error results.
.PP
If the adaptor does not support the exact hue, saturation,
brightness, and contrast levels supplied, the closest levels
supported are assumed.  Use XvGetPortAttribute(3) 
to query the resulting levels.
.PP
When an XvSetPortAttribute(3) request is processed, a 
PortControlNotify(3) event is generated for all clients 
that have requested for port changes using XvSelectPortNotify(3).
.SH Returned Values
.IP [Success] 8
Returned if XvSetPortAttribute(3) completed successfully.
.IP [XvBadExtension] 8
Returned if the Xv extension is unavailable.
.IP [XvBadAlloc] 8
Returned if XvSelectVideoNotify(3) failed to allocate memory to process
the request.
.SH Diagnostics
.IP [XvBadPort] 8
Generated if the requested port does not exist.
.IP [XvBadEncoding] 8
Generated if an encoding is specified that does not exist.
.IP [BadMatch] 8
Generated if the requested attribute atom does not specify an attribute 
supported by the adaptor.
.SH See Also
.\"
XvGetPortAttribute(3), XvSelectPortNotify(3), XvPortNotify(3)
.br
