\input texinfo                  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename imaxima.info
@settitle Imaxima Manual
@paragraphindent 0
@c @set VERSION 1.0b
@c @set UPDATED June 7
@include version.texi
@synindex fn cp
@synindex vr cp
@synindex pg cp
@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Imaxima: (imaxima).   Image support for the computer algebra system Maxima. Interactive math minor mode.
@end direntry

@iftex
@c @finalout
@end iftex
@ifinfo
This file documents Imaxima.

Copyright (C) 2002, 2003, 2004 Jesper Harder
Copyright (C) 2004, 2007, 2008 Yasuaki Honda

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Imaxima Manual
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATED}
@author by Jesper Harder and Yasuaki Honda. Imath mode by Yasuaki Honda.
@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 2002, 2003, 2004 Jesper Harder 
Copyright @copyright{} 2004, 2007, 2008 Yasuaki Honda   

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of@*
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice@*
are preserved on all copies.
@end titlepage
@page

@node Top
@top Imaxima
Imaxima is a package for displaying the output from the computer
algebra system Maxima as images typeset by @TeX{}.

This manual documents imaxima version @value{VERSION}. You can
download the latest version of imaxima from
@uref{http://members3.jcom.home.ne.jp/imaxima/}.

Since version 1.0b, imaxima and imath supports inline graph. 

Send suggestions and bug reports to @email{imaxima@@mac.com, Yasuaki
Honda}. 

@menu
* Installation::      Installing imaxima (and breqn).
* Usage::             Commands you can use in imaxima.
* Inline Graph::      Commands you can use for inline graph.
* Options::           Customizing imaxima.
* Imath minor mode::  Interactive Math minor mode.
* Index::
@end menu

@node Installation
@chapter Installation
@cindex breqn
Install imaxima by unpacking the tarball and doing the usual
incantation

@example
./configure
make
make install
@end example

@noindent
and put

@lisp
(autoload 'imaxima "imaxima" "Image support for Maxima." t)
@end lisp

@noindent
in your @file{.emacs} file.

If you use Interactive Math minor mode, put

@lisp
(autoload 'imath-mode "imath" "Interactive Math minor mode." t)
@end lisp

@noindent
in your @file{.emacs} file.


To do line breaking imaxima requires the LaTeX package @code{breqn}. This
package is officially distributed by Morten Høgholm from
@uref{http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/contrib/mh} as mh.zip.

Alternatively, for the easy installation, you may download
@uref{http://members3.jcom.home.ne.jp/imaxima/breqn097a.zip}. 
Compared to mh.zip, breqn097a.zip contains all the @file{*.sty} and
@file{*.sym} files in it.

The files in @code{breqn} must be installed in a place where @TeX{}
can find them.  In a typical teTeX installation you should put the
@file{*.sty} and @file{*.sym} files in

@example
@file{/usr/share/texmf/tex/latex/breqn/}
@end example

@noindent
and the documentation files in 

@example
@file{/usr/share/texmf/doc/latex/breqn/}.  
@end example

The files can also be installed in a number of other places---consult
your @TeX{} documentation for details.

Now run @command{texhash} after installing the files.  You can use the
command @command{kpsewhich} to verify that @TeX{} is able to find the
files, e.g.

@example
kpsewhich breqn.sty
@end example

To get the best image quality a fairly recent version of Ghostscript
is recommended.  @xref{Miscellaneous}, for options suitable for using
older versions of Ghostscript or not using Ghostscript at all

@section Manual installation
If you cannot use @command{make}, the manual steps required for
installation are

@itemize  @bullet{}
@item 
Byte compile @file{imaxima.el} and @file{imath.el}.
@item
Place the files @file{imaxima.el}, @file{imaxima.elc}, @file{imath.el},
@file{imath.elc}, @file{imaxima-autoconf-variables.el} and
@file{imaxima.lisp} in Emacs' @code{load-path} (@pxref{Lisp Libraries,
, , emacs, The Emacs manual}).
@item
Install the @TeX{} files in the way explained above.
@end itemize

@node Usage
@chapter Usage
To start using imaxima just type @kbd{M-x imaxima}.

@defun imaxima
Starts a Maxima session in an Emacs buffer.
@end defun

You can turn image generation off by evaluating

@example
display2d:true
@end example

@noindent
in Maxima.  Output from Maxima is then shown with the usual
@acronym{ASCII} graphics.  To turn images on again, evaluate

@example
display2d:imaxima
@end example

If there is an error in a LaTeX expression you can press @kbd{Mouse-2}
(or @kbd{@key{RET}}) on the error message to view the error log and
@kbd{Mouse-3} (or @kbd{M-@key{RET}}) to view the LaTeX source file.

@defopt imaxima-use-maxima-mode-flag
Set to non-@code{nil} to use the Maxima mode from @code{maxima.el}.

By default @code{imaxima.el} uses a very simple mode which doesn't
provide any custom menus, font-locking or key-bindings.  You can,
however, combine @code{imaxima.el} with the Emacs mode from the Maxima
distribution to get these features.
@end defopt

@defun imaxima-latex
Converts the Maxima buffer to a LaTeX document and opens it in LaTeX
mode. @emph{Note:} This command does not work in XEmacs.
@end defun

@defun imaxima-to-html
Converts the Maxima buffer to a HTML document named session.html 
and opens it in HTML mode. All the PNG files generated by imaxima 
for each output from Maxima are gathered in a folder named session-images
and referenced from session.html. @emph{Note:} This command does not 
work in XEmacs. 
@end defun

@defun imaxima-clean-up
Delete temporary files created by imaxima and kill the Ghostscript
process if it is running.  Normally imaxima does this automatically
when you quit Maxima.  This command is just a convenience if
this doesn't happen.
@end defun

@defun imaxima-version
Display the package name and the version number of the imaxima imath
package in the mini buffer. You should make sure the version 
information when you want to make bug reports.
@end defun

@defun reinit-imaxima
Initialize the imaxima program. Sometimes you may encounter situations
where imaxima does not repond to your input. This is caused by the
inconsistency between Emacs Lisp and Maxima. Such situations can be
resolved by using this command. After calling this command from the
Emacs mini buffer, you should type simple Maxima expression such as
1+2; to ensure that the imaxima does respond to you now.
@end defun

@node Inline Graph
@chapter Inline Graph

Since version 1.0b, imaxima and imath supports the inline graph display
feature. That is, if a special graph command (such as wxplot2d, wxplot3d)
is used in the maxima session, the graph generated by the command is 
inserted in the maxima session buffer, instead of displaying in other
window.


Before using this feature, you must make sure @code{plot2d} does work
with Gnuplot by trying:
@example
(%i1) plot2d(x^2,[x,-5,5],[plot_format,gnuplot]);
@end example
If this works fine, then quite likely @code{wxplot2d} works, too.

Following commands can be used in a maxima session to draw graphs to
be displayed inline: @code{wxplot2d}, @code{wxplot3d}, @code{wxdraw2d},
@code{wxdraw3d}, @code{wximplicit_plot}, and @code{wxcontour_plot}.

They correspond to their original commands @code{plot2d}, @code{plot3d}, @code{draw2d},
@code{draw3d}, @code{implicit_plot}, and @code{contour_plot}. 

The syntax of the wx-prefixed versions of the commands and their
arguments are the same as the ones of the corresponding original
commands. Hence, @code{wxplot2} draws a graph inline in maxima session,
while @code{plot2d} displays the same graph in the different window.

The wx-prefixed versions of the commands set up arguments so that Gnuplot
is used to draw the graph and writes the graph in extended postscript 
format into a temporary file. So, it is suggested not to use plot options
such as @code{plot_format}.

@code{wxdraw2d} and @code{wxdraw3d} autamatically load the draw package since
they call @code{draw2d} and @code{draw3d} internally.


@node Options
@chapter Options

@menu
* Appearance::                  Size, colors, fonts.
* Line Breaking::               Options for breaking wide equations.
* Miscellaneous::               Various options.
@end menu

All options can be changed in the Emacs customize interface, use
@kbd{M-x customize-group @key{RET} imaxima @key{RET}}.

@node Appearance
@section Appearance

@defopt imaxima-pt-size
The type size used in LaTeX.  This can be @samp{9}, @samp{10},
@samp{11} or @samp{12} pt.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-fnt-size
Default size of font.  Options include @samp{small},
@samp{normalsize}, @samp{large}, @samp{Large}, @samp{LARGE},
@samp{huge} or @samp{Huge} (in non decreasing order).
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-scale-factor
Scale all images by this factor.  The default is @samp{1.0}.
@end defopt

@emph{Note:} The options @code{imaxima-pt-size},
@code{imaxima-fnt-size} and @code{imaxima-scale-factor} are highly
non-orthogonal.

@defopt imaxima-equation-color
Color used for equations.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-label-color
Color used for output labels (red by default).
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-bg-color
Background color used in the imaxima buffer.  @code{nil} if you don't want
to change the default color.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-fg-color
Foreground color used in the imaxima buffer.  @code{nil} if you don't want
to change the default color.
@end defopt



@defopt imaxima-latex-preamble
LaTeX expression inserted at the start of the document preamble when
TeX'ing equations.  This can be used to change, say, the document font.
E.g.

@example
\usepackage@{concrete@}
\usepackage@{euler@}
@end example

@cindex euler
@cindex concrete
will use Herman Zapf's Euler math fonts and the accompanying Concrete
roman fonts.  These are probably better suited as screen fonts than the
default Computer Modern, which works best at high resolutions.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-latex-error-face
Face used for LaTeX errors.  This option is ignored when using
@code{maxima.el}.
@end defopt

@node Line Breaking
@section Line Breaking
Imaxima usually does a decent job of breaking lines that are too wide
to fit in the buffer (thanks to the @code{breqn} LaTeX package).
However, this doesn't work so well for very long fractions,
superscripts and subscripts.  Imaxima has two ways of dealing with
this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Scaling.
@item
Rewriting the equation in a ``linear'' form which can be split over
several lines.
@end itemize

The following options control how this is done.


@defopt imaxima-max-scale
Maximum amount of scaling allowed to fit wide equations in the buffer.
The default is @code{0.85}, which allows images to be scaled down to
85% of the original size. @code{nil} disables scaling and @code{t}
allows unlimited scaling.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-linearize-flag
Non-@code{nil} allows fractions, superscripts, subscripts and square
roots to be linearized to fit in the buffer.  That is
@ifnottex
@example

         b                           a + b         _______
        a              a            -------       V a + b 
                        b            c + d
@end example
@end ifnottex
@tex
$$a^b \quad a_b \quad {{a+b}\over{c+d}} \quad \sqrt{a+b}$$
@end tex

are written as

@ifnottex
@example
                                                          ?
    expt(a,b)   subscript(a,b)   (a + b)/(c + d)   (a + b)
@end example
@end ifnottex
@tex
$${\rm expt}(a,b) \quad {\rm subscript}(a,b) \quad (a+b)/(c+d) \quad (a+b)^{1/2}$$
@end tex
@end defopt

@node Miscellaneous
@section Miscellaneous
If the required files are in your path, you shouldn't normally need to
change these options.

@cindex png
@cindex jpeg
@defopt imaxima-image-type
Image type used in the buffer.  @acronym{PNG}, @acronym{JPEG},
@acronym{TIFF} and PostScript are supported.  In my opinion
@acronym{PNG} gives the best results, but if your Emacs wasn't
compiled with @acronym{PNG} support you could try one of the others.
PostScript doesn't require Ghostscript to be installed.  XEmacs can
not display PostScript images, so this type does not work in XEmacs.
@end defopt

@cindex ghostscript
@defopt imaxima-gs-program
Ghostscript executable
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-gs-options
Options passed to @command{gs} when converting @acronym{EPS} to other
image formats.  Older versions of Ghostscript don't support
anti-aliasing. In that case you might have to remove the options
@option{-dTextAlphaBits=4} and @option{-dGraphicsAlphaBits=4}.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-dvips-program
Dvips executable.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-dvips-options
Command line options passed to @command{dvips} when converting
@acronym{EPS} files to @acronym{DVI}.
@end defopt 

@defopt imaxima-tmp-dir
Directory used for temporary files created by imaxima.
@file{/tmp} by default.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-lisp-file 
The Lisp file used to initialize Maxima.
@end defopt 

@defopt imaxima-tex-program
@TeX{} executable.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-initex-option
Option passed to @TeX{} to start it in the ``initial'' form capable of
dumping format files.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-maxima-program
Maxima executable.
@end defopt

@cindex CMUCL
@defopt imaxima-maxima-options
Command line arguments passed to Maxima.  If you have Maxima versions
compiled with different Lisps, you can use this to select which one to
use.  E.g. @option{--lisp=cmucl} will choose the version compiled with
CMUCL.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-startup-hook
Hook run when starting imaxima.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-exit-hook
Hook run when exiting imaxima.
@end defopt

@defopt imaxima-html-dir
When imaxima-to-html function is called, the function determines
the directory into which the session.html file and the 
session-images directory are created. The default value is ``~''.
@end defopt


@node Imath minor mode
@chapter Imath minor mode
The imath minor mode provides a small set of functions to aid
insert math formulas into plain text. 

A math formula is written using a Maxima form whose syntax is
@{maxima a formula maxima@} where a formula is a string which can
be accepted as Maxima command input. C-c [ inserts a template
for a maxima form. 

The other way to write a math formula is to use LaTeX form
whose syntax is @{latex a formula latex@} where a formula is 
a valid LaTeX commands. C-c ] inserts a template for a latex
form.

Example maxima and latex forms are:
@example
@{maxima integrate(f(x),x) maxima@}
@{maxima sum(a[n],n,0,i) maxima@}
@{latex  \\int @{f\\left(x\\right)@}@{\\;dx@} latex@}
@{latex  \\sum_@{n=0@}^@{i@}@{a_@{n@}@} latex@}
@end example

Assuming the cursor position is right after a form or in the
middle, C-c ! transforms the form into the formula image using
the Imaxima functionality.

If the resulting image is not what you want, you may want to edit
the formula again. To do this, place the cursor right after the
image and C-c &. Then the image is removed and original form
appears at the position.

When saving the buffer into a file, images are
discarded. However, maxima forms and their correspoding latex
forms are kept there in the text. If the text is loaded again
into Emacs and imath minor mode is enabled, you can type C-c $ to
restore all the images for the forms in the buffer.

@example
\C-c[   Compose Maxima form
\C-c]   Compose Latex form
\C-c!   Transform a form to an image
\C-c$   Transform all forms to images
\C-c&   Remove the image to restore the original form text
@end example

You can export the imath mode buffer contents into HTML using
a command named imath-to-html. This command can be invoked by
M-x imath-to-html. Then a buffer is created, visiting a file
whose name is the same as the original imath text file, only
exception being .html as the file extension. Upon saving, the
file is placed in the same directory as the original file. Also
a directory is created whose name is the same as the imath text
file, but removing the extension and add -images. Images for
formulas are copied in this directory. 

@node Index
@chapter Index
@printindex cp

@contents
@bye

@c End:
