.PU
.TH wvWare 1 
.SH NAME
wvWare \- convert msword documents
.SH SYNOPSIS
.ll +8
.B wvWare [-c charset] [--charset charset] [-p password] [--password password] [-x config.xml] [--config config.xml] [-d dir] [--dir dir] filename
.ll -8
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I wvWare converts word documents into other formats
such as PS,PDF,HTML,LaTeX,DVI,ABW  
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.I "\-c charset, \-\-charset charset"
word 97 documents are stored in one of two formats, either in 8 bit
windows codepages or in 16 bit unicode. The unicode can be converted
easily into utf-8, and the codepages are promoted to unicode and
converted from there, except for the western european codepage
which is always converted to iso-5589-15 if possible. This is the 
default behaviour. While it is possible to convert into other formats or
to force a conversion to a particular format, it is not recomended as 
you don't get a guarantee that the output will be correct. For instance, if
you convert an english document into koi8-r encoding then it will
be wrong, but if you are sure then you can override the default
output format. The charsets that are available depend on your system:
systems using the gnu libc 2 and above can convert to just about anything;
systems that at, wv configure time, prove to be inadequate for charset
conversion use wv's internal conversion formats which are a small subset
of the possible conversions, namely:
utf-8
iso-5589-15
koi8-r
tis-620
.TP
.I "\-p password, \-\-password password"
Due to heroic work done by a great team of workers, the wv library can decrypt password protected
word 97 and older versions of word documents given the correct password.
.TP
.I "\-d dir, \-\-dir dir"
If dir is used then any created graphics will be placed in this directory. The default is the directory
in which the word document resides.
.TP
.I "\-x config.xml, \-\-config config.xml"
Use this to give the location of the config file. If not used, the config file is searched for
by first checking the current directory, and then by looking in the install location
(/usr/local/lib/wv/wvHtml.xml by default)
.SH MORE INFORMATION
http://wvware.sourceforge.net
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR wvAbw(1),
.BR wvHtml(1),
.BR wvLatex(1),
.BR wvCleanLatex(1),
.BR wvPS(1),
.BR wvDVI(1),
.BR wvPDF(1),
.BR wvRTF(1),
.BR wvText(1),
.BR wvWml(1),
.BR wvMime(1),
.BR catdoc(1), 
.BR word2x(1)
.SH "AUTHOR"
 Dom Lachowicz (current author and maintainer) 
 Caolan McNamara (original author)
 WEB: http://wvware.sourceforge.net
 MAIL: cinamod@hotmail.com
