.\"
.\" $Id: mrxvt.1,v 1.94 2005/06/10 01:28:34 cvs Exp $
.\"
.TH mrxvt 1 "20 January 2005" "X Version 11" "X Tools" 
.SH NAME
mrxvt \- a tabbed VT102 terminal emulator for X Window System

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmrxvt\fP [options...]

.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fBmrxvt\fP program is a terminal emulator for X Window System.
It provides DEC VT102 compatible terminals for programs that cannot
use the window system directly.

Mrxvt is based on rxvt 2.7.11 CVS, features most of functionalties
of rxvt and mostly the multi-tab functionality. Thus, you can have
several terminals in the same window. Like rxvt, it aims to be light,
fast, flexible and desktop independant, thus KDE or GNOME are not
required.

The primary features of mrxvt include (but not limit to) multi-tab
and runtime changeable tab titles, command for each tab, input 
broadcasting, true translucent window, fast pseudo-transparent
background, user supplied background images (XPM, JPEG, PNG),
background color tinting, off-focus fading, text shadow, multiple
style (NeXT, Rxvt, Xterm, SGI, Plain) scrollbar, XIM, multi-languages
(Chinese, Korean, Japanese), freetype font and logging.

Mrxvt can be configured with a resource file. Several configuration
files can be used, and by default it is ~/.mrxvtrc. Alternative
configuration files are ~/.Xdefaults and ~/.Xresources. Configuration
files specified by command line option -cf override the X resources
of standard files, and command line options override X resources
found in files.


.SH OPTIONS
Mrxvt accepts the following command line options (if the option
begins with a `+' instead of a `-', the option is turned off).
Some options have corresponding X resource names, and they are
listed in [] in the format like [resource_name]. Notice that
the resource names are case sensitive. Make sure you write them
correctly in the configuration file.

\" Terminal name, display, etc.
.IP "\fB-name\fP \fIname\fP"
client instance, icon, and title strings [clientName]
.IP "\fB-n\fP \fIiconname\fP"
icon name for window [iconName]
.IP "\fB-iconic\fP|\fB+iconic\fP"
start iconic
.IP "\fB-display\fP|\fB-d\fP \fIdisplayname\fP"
X display name, the X server to contact
.IP "\fB-tn\fP \fItermname\fP"
value of the TERM environment variable [termName]
.IP "\fB-title\fP \fIstring\fP"
title name of the window [title]
.IP "\fB-geometry\fP|\fB-g\fP  \fIgeometry\fP"
geometry at startup [geometry]
\" Transparency
.IP "\fB-o\fP \fI%d\fP"
transluscent window (true transparent) background opacity degree.
%d is an integer between 0 and 100. This option needs transluscent
support by the X server, e.g., Xorg 6.8, and overrides the
pseudo-transparency [opacity]
.IP "\fB-od\fP \fInumber\fP"
translucent window opacity degree increase/decrease interval. The
number is between 0 and 100 [opacityDegree]
.IP "\fB-tr\fP|\fB+tr\fP"
background pseudo-transparency [transparent]
.IP "\fB-trm\fP|\fB+trm\fP"
pseudo-transparent menubar background, pseudo-transparency must be
turned on [transparentMenubar]
.IP "\fB-trs\fP|\fB+trs\fP"
pseudo-transparent scrollbar background, pseudo-transparency must
be turned on [transparentScrollbar]
.IP "\fB-trt\fP|\fB+trt\fP"
pseudo-transparent tabbar background, pseudo-transparency must be
turned on [transparentTabbar]
\" Background images
.IP "\fB-pixmap\fP \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
background image for all terminals if not set individually,
pseudo-transparency must be turned off [Pixmap]
.IP "\fB-vt%d.pixmap\fP \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
background image for %d terminal. %d is an integer and it starts from
0, NOT 1!!! Pseudo-transparency must be turned off [vt%d.Pixmap]
.IP "\fB-tbpixmap\fP \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
tabbar background image, pseudo-transparency must be turned off
[tabbarPixmap]
.IP "\fB-tupixmap\fP|\fB+tupixmap\fP"
apply tabbar background image to tabs [tabPixmap]
.IP "\fB-mbpixmap\fP \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
menubar background image, pseudo-transparency must be turned off
[menubarPixmap]
.IP "\fB-sbpixmap\fP \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
scrollbar background image, pseudo-transparency must be turned off
[scrollbarPixmap]
\" Scrollbar
.IP "\fB-sb\fP|\fB+sb\fP" 
scrollbar [scrollBar]
.IP "\fB-j\fP|\fB+j\fP" 
jump scrolling [jumpScroll]
.IP "\fB-sr\fP|\fB+sr\fP"
scrollbar on right [scrollbarRight]
.IP "\fB-st\fP|\fB+st\fP"
scrollbar without a trough [scrollbarFloating]
.IP "\fB-sbt\fP|\fBnumber\fP"
scrollbar thickness/width [scrollbarThickness]
.IP "\fB-ss\fP|\fBmode\fP"
scrollbar style: plain|xterm|rxvt|next|sgi [scrollbarStyle]
.IP "\fB-sa\fP|\fBmode\fP"
scrollbar alignment: top|bottom [scrollbarAlign]
.IP "\fB-sw\fP|\fB+sw\fP"
scroll with buffer [scrollWithBuffer]
.IP "\fB-si\fP|\fB+si\fP"
scroll-on-tty-output inhibit [scrollTtyOutputInhibit]
.IP "\fB-sk\fP|\fB+sk\fP"
scroll-on-keypress [scrollTtyKeypress]
.IP "\fB-sl\fP \fInumber\fP"
number of scrolled lines to save for all terminals if not set
individually. The maximal number of saved lines is 65535 [saveLines]
.IP "\fB-vt%d.sl\fP \fInumber\fP"
number of scrolled lines to save for %d terminal. %d is an integer
and it starts from 0, NOT 1!!! The maximal number of saved lines is
65535 [vt%d.saveLines]
\" Colors
.IP "\fB-bgfade\fP \fI%d\fP"
make colors %d darker for background image or pseudo-transparent
background. %d is an integer between 0 and 100. This option is
different from tinting and shade below! But you can think it as
tinting the background with black color [backgroundFade]
.IP "\fB-fade\fP \fI%d\fP"
make colors %d darker when mrxvt is loosing focus. %d is an integer
between 0 and 100 [fading]
.IP "\fB-tint\fP \fIcolor\fP"
color tinted on background image or pseudo-transparent background,
shade degree must be defined as well [tintColor]
.IP "\fB-shade\fP \fI%d\fP"
shade background by %d degree when tinting the background with
color. %d is an integer between 0 and 100 [shading]
.IP "\fB-tinttype\fP \fItype\fP"
function applied for background tinting (not implemented yet)
.IP "\fB-bgtype\fP \fItype\fP"
transformation type for background pixmap (not implemented yet)
.IP "\fB-txttype\fP \fItype\fP"
function applied for text drawing (not implemented yet)
.IP "\fB-vt%d.fg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
foreground color of %d terminal. %d is an integer and it starts from
0, NOT 1!!! [vt%d.foreground]
.IP "\fB-vt%d.bg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
background color of %d terminal. %d is an integer and it starts from
0, NOT 1!!! [vt%d.background]
.IP "\fB-fg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
default foreground color [foreground]
.IP "\fB-bg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
default background color [background]
.IP "\fB-ufbg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
default background color when lose focus [ufBackground]
.IP "\fB-tabfg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
foreground color of tabbar [tabForeground]
.IP "\fB-tabbg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
background color of tabbar and active tabs [tabBackground]
.IP "\fB-itabfg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
foreground color of inactive tabs [itabForeground]
.IP "\fB-itabbg\fP \fIcolor\fP"
background color of inactive tabs [itabBackground]
.IP "\fB-bd\fP \fIcolor\fP"
border color [borderColor]
.IP "\fB-cr\fP \fIcolor\fP"
color of cursor [cursorColor]
.IP "\fB-pr\fP \fIcolor\fP"
color of pointer [pointerColor]
.IP "\fB-ts\fP \fIcolor\fP"
color of text shadow [textShadow]
.IP "\fB-tsm\fP \fImode\fP"
text shadow mode, specify shadow position of text:
left|right|top|bottom|topleft|topright|botleft|botright|none
[textShadowMode]
\" Fonts
.IP "\fB-fn\fP \fIfontname\fP"
normal text X11 font name [font]
.IP "\fB-fb\fP \fIfontname\fP"
bold text X11 font name [boldFont]
.IP "\fB-fm\fP \fIfontname\fP"
multichar text X11 font name [mfont]
.IP "\fB-xftfn\fP \fIfontname\fP"
normal text freetype font family. The xft option must be enabled
[xftFont]
.IP "\fB-xftfm\fP \fIfontname\fP"
multichar text freetype font family. The xft option must be enabled
[xftmFont]
.IP "\fB-xftmsz\fP \fInumber\fP"
freetype multichar font size in pixel. The xft option must be enabled
[xftmSize]
.IP "\fB-xftslow\fP|\fB+xftslow\fP"
display freetype multichar string in slow mode for better display
effect. The xft option must be enabled [xftSlowOutput]
.IP "\fB-xftnfm\fP|\fB+xftnfm\fP"
do not load freetype mfont, use freetype font instead. This can avoid
large line space if the size of font and mfont are very different.
The xft option must be enabled [xftNomFont]
.IP "\fB-xft\fP|\fB+xft\fP"
use freetype font instead of X11 font. This option controls all other
freetype font related options [xft]
.IP "\fB-xftaa\fP|\fB+xftaa\fP"
antialias of freetype font. This makes font look more polish, but
significantly slows down the rendering speed. The xft option must be
enabled [xftAntialias]
.IP "\fB-xftht\fP|\fB+xftht\fP"
hinting of freetype font. The xft option must be enabled [xftHinting]
.IP "\fB-xftah\fP|\fB+xftah\fP"
autohint of freetype font. The xft option must be enabled [xftAutoHint]
.IP "\fB-xftga\fP|\fB+xftga\fP"
global advance of freetype font. The xft option must be enabled
[xftGlobalAdvance]
.IP "\fB-xftwt\fP \fIstyle\fP"
freetype font weight: light|medium|bold. The xft option must be
enabled  [xftWeight]
.IP "\fB-xftst\fP \fIstyle\fP"
freetype font slant: roman|italic|oblique. The xft option must be
enabled  [xftSlant]
.IP "\fB-xftrgb\fP \fIstyle\fP"
freetype font sub-pixel order: rgb|bgr|vrgb|vbgr|none. The xft option
must be enabled  [xftRGBA]
.IP "\fB-xftsz\fP \fInumber\fP"
freetype font size in pixel. The xft option must be enabled [xftSize]
.IP "\fB-xftrwd\fP \fIstyle\fP"
freetype font width: ultracondensed|condensed|normal|expanded|
ultraexpanded. The xft option must be enabled  [xftWidth]
\" Tabs and commands
.IP "\fB-tt\fP \fIstring\fP"
tab title for all terminals if not set individually [tabTitle]
.IP "\fB-vt%d.tt\fP \fIstring\fP"
tab title for %d terminal. %d is an integer and it starts from 0,
NOT 1!!! [vt%d.tabTitle]
.IP "\fB-vt%d.e\fP \fIstring\fP"
command to execute for %d terminal. %d is an integer and it
starts from 0, NOT 1!!! [vt%d.command]
.IP "\fB-sh\fP|\fB+sh\fP"
run shell in each tab before executing a tab command. Thus if the
tab command exits, the tab will not quit. [tabShell]
.IP "\fB-it\fP|\fB+it\fP"
run command for each tab only once on initialization, so that later
new terminal will run default shell instead of the tab command
[cmdInitTabs]
.IP "\fB-at\fP|\fB+at\fP"
run -e command for all terminals, this overrides the the default
behavior that the -e command is only effective for the first
terminal. It also overrides the behavior of tabShell [cmdAllTabs]
.IP "\fB-tnum\fP \fInumber\fP"
numbers of terminals at startup [initTermNumber]
.IP "\fB-ps\fP|\fB+ps\fP" 
protect tab from being closed if it is using the secondary screen,
for example, when the user is running vi or pine, this can prevent
the terminal from being accidently closed [protectSecondary]
.IP "\fB-stt\fP|\fB+stt\fP"
synchronize terminal title with tab title when switch to a new tab
or the title of the active tab changes [syncTabTitle]
.IP "\fB-sti\fP|\fB+sti\fP"
synchronize icon name with tab title when switch to a new tab
or the title of the active tab changes [syncTabIcon]
.IP "\fB-vbf\fP|\fB+vbf\fP"
show color text with bold font [veryBoldFont]
.IP "\fB-ht\fP|\fB+ht\fP"
hide tabbar on initialization [hideTabbar]
.IP "\fB-bt\fP|\fB+bt\fP"
show tabbar at bottom [bottomTabbar]
.IP "\fB-hb\fP|\fB+hb\fP"
hide buttons in the tabbar [hideButtons]
\" Multichar or multi-language
.IP "\fB-mcc\fP \fI+mcc\fP"
multichar cursor movement [multibyte_cursor]
.IP "\fB-km\fP \fImode\fP"
multichar encoding mode [multichar_encoding]
.IP "\fB-im\fP \fIname\fP"
name of X Input Method (XIM) [inputMethod]
.IP "\fB-pt\fP \fImode\fP"
XIM input style: OverTheSpot|OffTheSpot|Root [preeditType]
.IP "\fB-thai\fP \fI+thai\fP"
Thai support [thai]
.IP "\fB-grk\fP \fImode\fP"
Greek keyboard mapping: iso|ibm [greek_keyboard]
\" Menu
.IP "\fB-showmenu\fP|\fB+showmenu\fP"
show menubar [showMenu]
\" Visual effects
.IP "\fB-tcw\fP|\fB+tcw\fP"
triple click word selection [tripleclickwords]
.IP "\fB-bc\fP|\fB+bc\fP"
cursor blinking [cursorBlink]
.IP "\fB-bci\fP \fInumber\fP"
cursor blinking interval (ms) [cursorBlinkInterval]
.IP "\fB-ls\fP|\fB+ls\fP"
login shell [loginShell]
.IP "\fB-bl\fP|\fB+bl\fP"
borderless window [borderLess]
.IP "\fB-or\fP|\fB+or\fP"
override redirect [overrideRedirect]
.IP "\fB-b\fP \fInumber\fP"
internal border width [internalBorder]
.IP "\fB-bw\fP \fInumber\fP"
external border width [externalBorder]
.IP "\fB-w\fP \fInumber\fP"
external border width [externalBorder]
.IP "\fB-lsp\fP \fInumber\fP"
space between rows [lineSpace]
.IP "\fB-dh\fP|\fB+dh\fP"
disable keyboard shortcuts, including user defined shortcuts and
all default shortcuts [disableHotkeys]
.IP "\fB-ddh\fP|\fB+ddh\fP"
disable all default keyboard shortcuts, but user defined shortcuts
still work
.IP "\fB-lk\fP|\fB+lk\fP"
enable Linux console style Home/End keys
.IP "\fB-mod\fP \fImode\fP"
meta modifier: alt|meta|hyper|super|mod1|...|mod5 [modifier]
.IP "\fB-vb\fP|\fB+vb\fP"
visual bell [visualBell]
.IP "\fB-blc\fP \fIstring\fP"
bell command instead of beeping [bellCommand]
.IP "\fB-m8\fP|\fB+m8\fP"
enable meta8 [meta8]
.IP "\fB-mp\fP|\fB+mp\fP"
scroll one page when press mouse wheel button [mouseWheelScrollPage]
.IP "\fB-rv\fP|\fB+rv\fP"
reverse video [reverseVideo]
.IP "\fB-hold\fP|\fB+hold\fP"
hold the terminal when the child process in it exits [holdExit]
.IP "\fB-het\fP \fIstring\fP"
message to display on terminal title when a terminal is held
[holdExitText]
.IP "\fB-desktop\fP \fInumber\fP"
desktop to place the window (for gnome compatible window manager).
The number starts from 0, NOT 1!!! [desktop]
.IP "\fB-bcst\fP|\fB+bcst\fP"
broadcasting input to all terminals [broadcast]
\" Misc
.IP "\fB-ut\fP|\fB+ut\fP"
utmp inhibit [utmpInhibit]
.IP "\fB-cf\fP \fIfilename\fP"
X resource configuration file
.IP "\fB-cfs\fP \fIfilename\fP"
X resource configuration file to save the current configuration
[confFileSave]
.IP "\fB-sm\fP|\fB+sm\fP"
enable X session management [sessionMgt]
.IP "\fB-sid\fP \fIstring\fP"
client identity of mrxvt for X session management [smClientID]
.IP "\fB-C\fP"
intercept console messages

.SH X RESOURCES
Here is list of resources supported by mrxvt. Each as a default value
assigned to it. Mrxvt supports the XTerm class and application name is
mrxvt. The first character of class components is capitalized and the
first letter of name components is in lowercase. For example,
XTerm.Foreground is a class component and mrxvt.foreground is a name
component. Below is the list of resources:

.IP "\fBmrxvt.geometry\fP: \fIgeometry\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.reverseVideo\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.foreground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.background\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.ufBackground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tabForeground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tabBackground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.iTabForeground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.iTabBackground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.loginShell\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.borderLess\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.overrideRedirect\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.borderWidth\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.menu\fP: \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.showMenu\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollBar\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollbarAlign\fP: \fImode\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollbarRight\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollbarThickness\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollbarFloating\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollbarStyle\fP: \fImode\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollWithBuffer\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollTtyOutputInhibit\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollTtyKeypress\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollColor\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.troughColor\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.opacity\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.opacityDegree\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.transparent\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.transparentForce\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.transparentScrollbar\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.transparentMenubar\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.transparentTabbar\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.initTermNumber\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tabbarPixmap\fP: \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tabUsePixmap\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.menubarPixmap\fP: \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.scrollbarPixmap\fP: \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.fading\fP: \fIamount\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.textShadow\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.textShadowMode\fP: \fImode\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tintColor\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.shading\fP: \fIamount\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.bgType\fP: \fItype\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tintingType\fP: \fItype\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.textType\fP: \fItype\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.pixmap\fP: \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tabTitle\fP: \fIname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.syncTabTitle\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.syncTabIcon\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.veryBoldFont\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.hideTabbar\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.bottomTabbar\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.hideButtons\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.saveLines\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.vt.foreground\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.vt.background\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.vt.pixmap\fP: \fIfile[;geometry]\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.vt.tabTitle\fP: \fIname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.vt.saveLines\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.vt.command\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.tabShell\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cmdInitTabs\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cmdAllTabs\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.protectSecondary\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.name\fP: \fIname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.iconName\fP: \fIname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.termName\fP: \fIname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.minBufferWidth\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.utmpInhibit\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.visualBell\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.mapAlert\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.bellCommand\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.holdExit\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.holdExitText\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.desktop\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.broadcast\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.borderColor\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.initTermNumber\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.backgroundFade\fP: \fIamount\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.fading\fP: \fIamount\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.color\fP\fIn\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.colorBD\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.colorUL\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.path\fP: \fIpath\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.fontName\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.boldFont\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.font\fP\fIn\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.mfont\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.mfont\fP\fIn\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftFont\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftmFont\fP: \fIfontname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftmSize\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftSlowOutput\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftNomFont\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xft\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftAntialias\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftHinting\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftAutoHint\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftGlobalAdvance\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftWeight\fP: \fIlight|medium|bold\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftSlant\fP: \fIroman|italic|oblique\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftSize\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftWidth\fP: \fIultracondensed|condensed|normal|expanded|ultraexpended\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.xftRGBA\fP: \fIrgb|bgr|vrgb|vbgr|none\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.pointerColor\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cursorColor\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cursorColor2\fP: \fIcolor\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cursorBlink\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cursorBlinkInterval\fP: \fInumber\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.bigFontKey\fP: \fIkeysym\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.smallFontKey\fP: \fIkeysym\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.meta8\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.mouseWheelScrollPage\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.disableHotkeys\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.linuxHomeEndKey\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.modifier\fP: \fIkeysym\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.cutChars\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.acsChars\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.answerbackString\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.printPipe\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.selectStyle\fP: \fIold|oldword\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.backspaceKey\fP: \fIkeysym\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.deleteKey\fP: \fIkeysym\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.multichar_Encoding\fP: \fIencj|sjis|big5|gb|gbk|kr|noenc\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.inputMethod\fP: \fIname\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.preeditType\fP: \fIOverTheSpot|OffTheSpot|Root\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.greek_Keyboard\fP: \fIiso|ibm\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.greekToggle_Key\fP: \fIkeysym\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.confFileSave\fP: \fIstring\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.sessionMgt\fP: \fIboolean\fP"
.IP "\fBmrxvt.smClientID\fP: \fIstring\fP"

.IP "Example:"
.br
mrxvt*vt0*tabTitle:         term1
.br
mrxvt*vt1*tabTitle:         term2
.br
mrxvt*vt2*tabTitle:         term3
.br
mrxvt*vt0*saveLines:        600
.br
mrxvt*vt1*saveLines:        600
.br
mrxvt*vt2*saveLines:        600
.br
!mrxvt*vt0*Pixmap:          /home/images/vt0bg.xpm
.br
!mrxvt*vt1*Pixmap:          /home/images/vt1bg.xpm
.br
!mrxvt*vt2*Pixmap:          /home/images/vt2bg.xpm
.br
mrxvt*scrollbarStyle:       next
.br
mrxvt*initTermNumber:       3
.br
mrxvt*transparent:          True
.br
mrxvt*transparentScrollbar: False
.br
mrxvt*transparentTabbar:    False
.br
mrxvt*transparentMenubar:   False
.br
mrxvt*foreground:           white
.br
mrxvt*background:           black

Put the above lines in your $HOME/.mrxvtrc file or in a configuration
file you will load with -cf option at startup. You can consult to
the xdefaults-sample.txt in the doc/ directory for more details.
.br


.SH FILES
The actual pathnames given may differ on your system.
.IP "\fB/etc/utmp\fP"
System file for login records\&.
.IP "\fB/usr/lib/X11/rgb\&.txt\fP" 
Color names\&.
.IP "\fB/usr/X11R6/lib/X11/app-defaults/XTerm\fP"
if enable xgetdefaults at compiled time, this is the first
configuration file read. 
.IP "\fB~/.mrxvtrc\fP"
this is the default configuration file (since 0.3.9). If presents,
resources read from this file override existing resources.
.IP "\fB~/.Xdefaults\fP"
this is the default configuration file (before 0.3.9). If presents,
resources read from this file override existing resources.
.IP "\fB~/.Xresources\fP"
if .mrxvtrc and .Xdefaults was not found, try this one.
.br


.SH KEYBOARD SHORTCUT
You have several default keyboard shortcuts to ease the use of mrxvt.
The default gnome-terminal/konsole/rxvt shortcuts are supported. For
a list of the default shortcuts, please read the TIPS file in the
doc/ directory.

From mrxvt 0.3.10, it is also possible to change the default keyboard
shortcuts or define new keyboard shortcuts for certain predefined 
functions via the configuration file. The format of the keyboard
shortcut definition is like this:

.br
mrxvt*hotkey*FuncName:         Ctrl+Shift+v

For each shutcut definition, you must define one or more of the
three meta keys: `ctrl', `meta' and `shft'. Meta keys are separated
by the `+' character. Besides of meta keys, you must also define a
shortcut key, like the `v' character in the above example. The
shortcut key also is separated from the meta keys by the `+'
character. The shortcut key must be the last field of the definition.
The shortcut definition cannot contain any spaces. For some special
keys, like `Page Up' and `Page Dn' on the keyboard, their shortcut
keys are as the following:

.br
Page Up: Page_Up
.br
Page Down: Page_Down
.br
_: Shift+underscore
.br
+: Shift+plus

There is a special meta key `primary', which is not associated to
any keys on the keyboard. It is used to control the behavior of a
shortcut key. In particular, if it is defined for a shortcut key,
this shortcut key will be only effective in the primary screen.
So if you are running certain applications that is using the second
screen, like mc and vi, this shortcut key is disabled temporarily.
The following example defines Ctrl_v as the shortcut key to paste
selection. But it will not be effective in vi and mc.

.br
mrxvt*hotkey*PasteSel:         Ctrl+Primary+v

If you define the same keyboard shortcuts for two or more functions,
the latest definition will override the previous definitions. You can
also define multiple keyboard shortcuts for the same function. But
keep in mind that there is a limit on the total number of definitions.
Currently it is 4 times the total number of available functions.
(Seriously, who wants to remember 4 different keyboard shortcuts
for each function? ;-))

Sometimes you may want to remove a default keyboard shortcut. To do
so, you just need to define the function of the shortcut to `Dummy',
like the following example.

.br
mrxvt*hotkey*Dummy:            Ctrl+Shift+t

If you want to disable all keyboard shortcuts, enable the option
\fBdisableHotkeys\fP in the X resource file or \fB-dh\fP in the
command line. If you only want to disable all default shortcuts,
enable the option \fB-ddh\fP in the command line.

Notice that keyboard shortcuts definitions are incompatible with
X Windows own resource parsing API, i.e., XGetDefaults. So, to
enable the keyboard shortcuts, you will need to enable resources
but disable xgetdefault when you configure mrxvt.

FuncName specifies the functions you can control via the keyboard
shortcuts. The available functions are:

.IP "\fBDummy\fP: clear an existing keyboard shortcut"
.IP "\fBChangeTitle\fP: change title of the active tab"
.IP "\fBNewTab\fP: create a new tab"
.IP "\fBKillTab\fP: kill the active tab"
.IP "\fBPrevTab\fP: activate the left tab"
.IP "\fBNextTab\fP: activate the right tab"
.IP "\fBPrevActiveTab\fP: activate the previous active tab"
.IP "\fBTab1\fP: activate the first tab"
.IP "\fBTab2\fP: activate the second tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab3\fP: activate the third tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab4\fP: activate the forth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab5\fP: activate the fifth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab6\fP: activate the sixth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab7\fP: activate the seventh tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab8\fP: activate the eighth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab9\fP: activate the ninth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab10\fP: activate the tenth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab11\fP: activate the eleventh tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBTab12\fP: activate the twelvth tab, if applicable"
.IP "\fBLeftMoveTab\fP: move active tab to left"
.IP "\fBRightMoveTab\fP: move active tab to right"
.IP "\fBDumpScreen\fP: dump screen of the active tab to printer"
.IP "\fBIncOpacity\fP: increase opacity (more transluscent)"
.IP "\fBDecOpacity\fP: decrease opacity (less transluscent)"
.IP "\fBTransparency\fP: toggle pseudo-transparency"
.IP "\fBHideTabbar\fP: hide/show tabbar"
.IP "\fBHideScrollbar\fP: hide/show scrollbar"
.IP "\fBHideMenubar\fP: hide/show menubar"
.IP "\fBHideButton\fP: hide/show tabbar buttons"
.IP "\fBVeryBold\fP: toggle very bold font for highlight text"
.IP "\fBHoldExit\fP: toggle holding of quitted children"
.IP "\fBBroadcast\fP: toggle broadcasting of input"
.IP "\fBSmallFont\fP: switch to smaller font"
.IP "\fBLargelFont\fP: switch to larger font"
.IP "\fBScrollUp\fP: scroll up one line"
.IP "\fBScrollDown\fP: scroll down one line"
.IP "\fBScrollPageUp\fP: scroll up one page"
.IP "\fBScrollPageDown\fP: scroll down one page"
.IP "\fBSaveConfig\fP: save the current configuration"
.IP "\fBCopySel\fP: save terminal selection into clipboard"
.IP "\fBPasteSel\fP: paste text from selection or clipboard"
.br


.SH ESCAPE SEQUENCE
You have several escape sequences to control mrxvt. The default
rxvt/xterm escape sequences are supported. For a list of escape
sequences, please read the TIPS/xterm.seq files in the doc/
directory.
.br


.SH ENVIRONMENT
Mrxvt sets the environment variable ``TERM'' for the window you
have created. It also uses and sets the environment variable
``DISPLAY'' to specify which bit map display terminal to use. The
environment variable ``WINDOWID'' is set to the X window id number
of the mrxvt window. It also sets the environment variable
``COLORTERM'' as the terminal sub-name and indicates its color,
and ``COLORFGBG'' as terminal foreground and background colors.
The environment variable ``MRXVT_TABTITLE'' records the initial
tab title of each terminal. Notice that its value will not be
altered if the user use hotkey or escape sequence to change the
tab title. The user must modify it manually after doing that.
.br



.SH KNOWN ISSUES
Transparency and tinting are global, not specific to a terminal.
.br
Off-focus fading does not work under freetype font.
.br
This man page is not finished
.br


.SH AUTHOR
.IP "Terminator \fI<jimmyzhou@users.sourceforge.net>\fP"
.br
