.\" Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" First parameter, NAME, should be all caps
.\" Second parameter, SECTION, should be 1-8, maybe w/ subsection
.\" other parameters are allowed: see man(7), man(1)
.\" Please adjust this date whenever revising the manpage.
.\"
.\" Some roff macros, for reference:
.\" .nh        disable hyphenation
.\" .hy        enable hyphenation
.\" .ad l      left justify
.\" .ad b      justify to both left and right margins
.\" .nf        disable filling
.\" .fi        enable filling
.\" .br        insert line break
.\" .sp <n>    insert n+1 empty lines
.\" for manpage-specific macros, see man(7)
.TH "EMELFM2" "1" "0.9.1" "Liviu" ""
.SH "NAME"
emelFM2 \- a GTK2+ file manager
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.B emelfm2
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIDIR\fR]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
emelFM2 is a file manager for UNIX\-like operating systems. It uses a simple and
efficient interface pioneered by Norton Commander in the 1980's. The main window
is divided into three "panes" or "panels". Two of them show information about
the contents of selected filesystem directories. That information is presented
as text. The third pane shows the output of commands executed within the program.

A built\-in command\-line, toolbar buttons or assigned keys can be used to initiate
commands. A flexible filetyping mechanism provides user\-determined actions for
desired filetypes.
.SH "COMMAND LINE OPTIONS"
.TP
\fB\-1\fR,\fB\-\-one\fR=\fI DIR\fR
At session\-start, show DIR in the first filelist pane.
.TP
\fB\-2\fR,\fB\-\-two\fR=\fI DIR\fR
At session\-start, show DIR in the second filelist pane.
.TP
\fBDIR\fR
Same as -2 DIR, except pane 2 is focused.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR,\fB\-\-config\fR=\fI DIR\fR
Set the configuration\-data directory to DIR (default: ~/.config/emelfm2).
.TP
\fB\-a\fR,\fB\-\-share\-config\fR=\fI DIR\fR
Also load configuration\-data from directory DIR. Session config data are not saved to DIR.
.TP
\fB\-e\fR,\fB\-\-encoding\fR=\fI TYPE\fR
Set the filesystem character encoding to TYPE.
.TP
\fB\-f\fR,\fB\-\-fallback\-encoding=\fI TYPE\fR
Set the fallback encoding to TYPE (default: ISO\-8859\-1).
.TP
\fB\-i\fR,\fB\-\-ignore\-problems\fR
Ignore the encoding/locale problems (use at your own risk!).
.TP
\fB\-l\fR,\fB\-\-log\-all\fR
Maximise GTK+2 error logging.
.TP
\fB\-m\fR,\fB\-\-daemon\fR
Detach the emelFM2 session from its controlling terminal. Will not work when emelFM2 is compiled with debug support.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR,\fB\-\-run\-at\fR\-start\fR\fR=\fI COMMAND\fR
Run COMMAND immediately after session start.
.TP
\fB\-s\fR,\fB\-\-set\-option OPTION_NAME=string\-value\fR
Set one\-line config option. "OPTION_NAME=string\-value" is a string in the format used in the config file.
.TP
\fB\-t\fR,\fB\-\-trash\fR=\fI DIR\fR
Set the trash directory to DIR (default: ~/.local/share/Trash/files).
.PP
.TP
\fB\-u\fR,\fB\-\-user\fR
Flag displayed username.
.PP

Help options:

.TP
\fB\-b\fR,\fB\-\-build\fR
Display build-time parameters.
.TP
\fB\-h\fR,\fB\-\-help\fR
Display a brief help message.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR,\fB\-\-version\fR
Display the version and build information.

.PP
These only work when emelFM2 is compiled with debug support:
.TP
\fB\-d\fR,\fB\-\-debug\fR=\fI N\fR
Set the debug level. N = digit from 1 (lowest) to 5 (highest). Default is 5.
.TP
\fB\-x\fR,\fB\-\-verbose\fR
Display time and location information in debug messages. Only works when emelFM2 is compiled with debug support.

.SH "FILES AND DIRECTORIES"
.TP
.I [PREFIX]/bin
Location for the emelFM2 binary. Default PREFIX is /usr/local, which may be modified
at compilation time.
.TP
.I [PREFIX]/lib/emelfm2/plugins
Default location for emelFM2 plugin files, named like e2p*.so.
.TP
.I [PREFIX]/share/doc/emelfm2
Default documentation files' location.
.TP
.I [PREFIX]/share/pixmaps/emelfm2
Default location of application\-specific icon files.
.TP
.I ~/.config/emelfm2
Default location for configuration files, named "config" and "cache".
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/Trash/files
Default trash directory.

.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
These are directly used:
.TP
.I G_BROKEN_FILENAMES, G_FILENAME_ENCODING, HOSTNAME, LC_ALL, LC_MESSAGES, LANGUAGE or LANG, PATH
.PP
.SH "SUGGESTIONS AND BUG REPORTS"
Please send bug reports, comments or feature requests to the mailing
list <emelfm2@freelists.org>. You do not need to be a subscriber.
.br
For known bugs refer to http://emelfm2.net/TODO.

.SH "CREDITS"
The original emelFM was essentially a compilation of some of the
features that Michael Clark found most useful in other file managers.
The current maintainer of emelFM2 is tooar. For a complete list of
contributors please refer to [PREFIX]/share/doc/emelfm2/CREDITS.

.SH "COPYRIGHT"
Copyright (C) 2003\-2013, tooar <tooar@emelfm2.net>.

.SH "LICENSE"
emelFM2 is licensed under the terms of the GNU General Public License
version 3 and is provided WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY. See that license for more details.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
Website           http://emelfm2.net
.br
User Guide        http://emelfm2.net/UserGuide
.br
Updated emelFM    http://www.havens.de/elm/emelfm.html
.br
Old emelFM        http://www.pitt.edu/~macst92/emelFM/ or
.br
                  http://emelFM.sourceforge.net/
.PP
