\input texinfo.tex
@setfilename mime-ui-en.info
@settitle{SEMI 1.14 Manual}
@titlepage
@title SEMI 1.14 Manual
@author MORIOKA Tomohiko <morioka@@jaist.ac.jp>
@subtitle 1998/07/03
@end titlepage
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top SEMI 1.14 Manual

@ifinfo

This file documents SEMI, a MIME user interface for GNU Emacs.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Introduction::                What is SEMI?
* MIME-View::                   MIME message viewing
* MIME-Edit::                   MIME message editing
* Various::                     Miscellaneous
* Concept Index::               
* Function Index::              
* Variable Index::              
@end menu

@node Introduction, MIME-View, Top, Top
@chapter What is SEMI?

SEMI is a package for GNU Emacs to provide features related with MIME
user interface.@refill

SEMI provides two user interfaces: MIME-View and MIME-Edit.@refill


MIME-View is a kernel of user interface to display or operate MIME
messages, STD 11 messages or ``localized RFC 822'' messages.@refill

MIME-Edit is a user interface to compose MIME messages.@refill

Each MUA can use powerful MIME features to combine these features.


@node MIME-View, MIME-Edit, Introduction, Top
@chapter MIME message viewing

MIME-View is a MIME viewer for wide use that runs on GNU Emacs.@refill

MIME-View is the kernel of the user interface for browsing MIME
messages. You can start some presentation-method which is a program for
creating some representation, or some acting-method which is a program
for processing the entity. Then you can deal with a variety of entities.


@menu
* Overview of MIME-View::       Basic design
* MIME-Preview::                Presentation of mime-preview-buffer
* mime-view-mode::              Operation in mime-preview-buffer
@end menu

@node Overview of MIME-View, MIME-Preview, MIME-View, MIME-View
@section Basic design

The representation form of the internet messages in electric letters
or in net news is based on STD 11. The STD 11 message body is a plain
text which consists of lines as its only structure, and the character
code is fixed as us-ascii. Actually, there are ``localized STD 11''
messages that use some character code in their linguistic range
instead of using us-ascii. Even in that case, the character code in
the message is single. Therefore, Message User Agents have considered
(byte row) = (us-ascii string), or (byte row) = (string in the
character code in the linguistic range).@refill

Although, the MIME message has the tree structure in entity unit.
And one message can contain multiple character codes. The content of
an entity can be not only a letter or an image that can be displayed
simply, but also can be a voice or an animation that are played for
some time interval, a data for some specific application, a source
code of some program, or an external reference that consists of
the usage of ftp or mail service, or some URL. Therefore the simple
extension of STD 11 user interface, which only consider displaying
the message, cannot treat all of the MIME functionalities.
Then it is not sufficient to decode message along its MIME type, but
it is also required to consider a playback processing through some
dialogue with the user. The format of MIME messages is designed
to easily be passed to automatic processing. But some contents in the
MIME message should not be passed to automatic processing for security
reasons. So it should be designed to ask user in such cases.
After all, in order to deal with MIME message, it is required to
distinguish the representation for information exchange which is
written in STD 11 or MIME construction, and its result
after some interpretation which is a display screen or a playback
process. It is also needed to converse with user for playback
processing.@refill

Therefore, MIME-View uses two buffers for one document, one is the
mime-raw-buffer that stores the representation for information exchange,
and the other is the mime-preview-buffer that stores the representation
for displaying.@refill

MIME-View provides a mode in the mime-preview-buffer for reading MIME
message, which is called as mime-view-mode. User can manipulate each
entity there.


@node MIME-Preview, mime-view-mode, Overview of MIME-View, MIME-View
@section Presentation of mime-preview-buffer

mime-view-mode displays information about each entity as@refill

@example
	[entity-button]
	(header)
	
	(body)
	(separator)
@end example

@noindent
You can change their design or inhibit showing some of them, according
to some condition.

See following example


@example
From: morioka@@jaist.ac.jp (MORIOKA Tomohiko)
Subject: Re: question?
Newsgroups: zxr.message.mime
Date: 22 Oct 93 11:02:44
Mime-Version: 1.0
Organization: Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
        Ishikawa, Japan

[1  (text/plain)]
  How to compose MIME message in MIME-Edit mode.

  C-c C-x ? shows its help.

C-c C-x C-t	insert a text message.
C-c C-x TAB	insert a (binary) file.
C-c C-x C-e	insert a reference to external body.
C-c C-x C-v	insert a voice message.
C-c C-x C-y	insert a mail or news message.
C-c C-x RET	insert a mail message.
C-c C-x C-s	insert a signature file at end.
C-c C-x t	insert a new MIME tag.
C-c C-x a	enclose as multipart/alternative.
C-c C-x p	enclose as multipart/parallel.
C-c C-x m	enclose as multipart/mixed.
C-c C-x d	enclose as multipart/digest.
C-c C-x s	enclose as PGP signed.
C-c C-x e	enclose as PGP encrypted.
C-c C-x C-k	insert PGP public key.
C-c C-x C-p	preview editing MIME message.
...

therefore, you should type C-c C-x C-i and specify the binary file
which you want to insert.

  You should select Base64 as MIME encoding for binary file.

[2  (image/gif)]

[3  (text/plain)]

  Like above, you can compose the message with image.

==================== Take A Cup Of Russian Tea  ======================
=========  ** Not With Jam Nor Marmalade But With Honey **  ==========
=========                 MORIOKA TOMOHIKO                  ==========
==============  Internet E-mail: <morioka@@jaist.ac.jp>  ==============
@end example



@menu
* entity-button::               
* entity-header::               
* entity-body::                 
@end menu

@node entity-button, entity-header, MIME-Preview, MIME-Preview
@subsection entity-button
@cindex entity-number
@cindex entity-button

@strong{entity-button} is a tag on the top of the entity
which shows brief information of the part.@refill

Normally, it appears as

@example
        [1.3 test (text/plain)]
@end example

@noindent

The number on the head describes the place of the entity in the
message (like the section number) and it is called as
@strong{entity-number}.@refill

The string in the next describes its title. This information is
taken from

@enumerate
@item
Title described in Content-Description field or Subject field
@item
File name specified by filename parameter in Content-Disposition field
@item
File name specified by name parameter in Content-Type field
@item
File name for uuencode'ing
@end enumerate

@noindent
If none of them are specified, displays a blank.

The 3rd item in the parenthesis describes media-type/subtype of
the entity. If it is is not MIME entity, it displays @code{nil}.
@refill

This entity-button plays a role like icon that symbolically
shows the content of the entity. For example, push @kbd{v} on

@example
        [2  (image/gif)]
@end example

@noindent
shows up the image contained there.

If the mouse operation is possible, you can display the image
by pushing 2nd button (the middle button for 3 button mouse) too.


@node entity-header, entity-body, entity-button, MIME-Preview
@subsection entity-header
@cindex entity-header

@strong{entity-header} is the header of the entity.
(Don't blame me as ``You say nothing more than as it is'',
It is no more than that.)

@node entity-body,  , entity-header, MIME-Preview
@subsection entity-body
@cindex entity-body

@strong{entity-body} is the content of the part.@refill

Sophistication does not seem enough here also, but it is really such
a thing.@refill

Though, it actually be twisted a little.@refill

The text entity is passed to code conversion according to its charset,
and the image entity should be converted on XEmacs.@refill

Details will be described later.


@node mime-view-mode,  , MIME-Preview, MIME-View
@section Operation in mime-preview-buffer

mime-preview-buffer posesses following functionalities.@refill

@table @kbd
@item @key{u}
go back to upper part (in the first part of the message,
go back to the Summary mode (*1))

@item @key{p}
go to previous part

@item @key{M-TAB}
go to previous part

@item @key{n}
go to next part

@item @key{TAB}
go to next part

@item @key{SPC}
scroll up

@item @key{M-SPC}
scroll down

@item @key{DEL}
scroll down

@item @key{RET}
go to next line

@item @key{M-RET}
go to previous line

@item @key{v}
play current part (*2)

@item @key{e}
extract file from current part (*2)

@item @key{C-c C-p}
print current part (*2)

@item @key{mouse-button-2}
start the mouse button in preview-buffer

on content-button, play current part (*2)@refill

on URL-button, start WWW browser@refill

@end table

@noindent
@strong{[Notice]}
@quotation

(*1) Do not go back to Summary mode unless appropriately
configured for mime-view in the MUA.@refill

(*2) actual behavior depends on the associated method
@end quotation



@node MIME-Edit, Various, MIME-View, Top
@chapter MIME message editing
@cindex MIME-Edit

@strong{MIME-Edit} is a general MIME composer for GNU Emacs.


@menu
* mime-edit-mode::              Minor-mode to edit MIME message
* single-part tags::            Operations for single-part
* enclosure tags::              Operations for enclosure
* other MIME-Edit operations::  Other operations
* file-type specification::     How to detect tag for inserted file
* transfer level::              
* message/partial sending::     Splitting
@end menu

@node mime-edit-mode, single-part tags, MIME-Edit, MIME-Edit
@section Minor-mode to edit MIME message
@cindex enclosure
@cindex multi-part ending tag
@cindex multi-part beginning tag
@cindex tag
@cindex mime-edit-mode

@strong{mime-edit-mode} is a minor mode to compose MIME message.  In
this mode, @strong{tag} represents various kinds of data, so you can
edit multi part message consists of various kinds of data, such as text,
image, audio, etc.@refill

There are 2 kinds of tags:

@itemize @bullet
@item
 single-part tag
@item
 multi-part tag
@end itemize

single-part tag represents single part, this form is following:@refill

@example
        --[[TYPE/SUBTYPE;PARAMETERS][ENCODING]
        OPTIONAL-FIELDS]
@end example

TYPE/SUBTYPE and PARAMETERS indicates type/subtype and parameters of
Content-Type (@ref{(mime-en)Content-Type}) field.  TYPE/SUBTYPE is
required, PARAMETERS is optional.@refill

ENCODING indicates Content-Transfer-Encoding
(@ref{(mime-ja)Content-Transfer-Encoding}) field.  It is optional
too.@refill

OPTIONAL-FIELDS is to represent another fields except Content-Type field
and Content-Transfer-Encoding field.@refill

multi-part tags represent multi part (@ref{(mime-en)multipart}).  They
consist of a pair of @strong{multi-part beginning tag} and
@strong{multi-part ending tag}.@refill

multi-part beginning tag's form is following:

@example
        --<<TYPE>>-@{
@end example

multi-part ending tag's form is following:

@example
        --@}-<<TYPE>>
@end example

A region from multi-part beginning tag to multi-part ending tag is
called as @strong{enclosure}.


@node single-part tags, enclosure tags, mime-edit-mode, MIME-Edit
@section Operations for single-part

Operations to make single-part are following:

@table @kbd
@item @key{C-c C-x C-t}
Insert single-part tag indicates text part.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-i}
Insert file as a MIME attachment.  If @kbd{C-u} is followed by it, it
asks media-type, subtype or encoding even if their default values are
specified. (cf. @ref{tag specification for inserted file})

@item @key{C-c C-x C-e}
Insert external part.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-v}
Record audio input until @kbd{C-g} is pressed, and insert as a
audio part. (It requires /dev/audio in default.)

@item @key{C-c C-x C-y}
Insert current (mail or news) message. (It is MUA depended.)

@item @key{C-c C-x C-m}
Insert mail message. (It is MUA depended.)

@item @key{C-c C-x C-w}, @key{C-c C-x C-s}
Insert signature.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-k}
Insert PGP (@ref{PGP}) public key. (It requires Mailcrypt package.)

@item @key{C-c C-x t}
Insert any single-part tag.

@end table



@node enclosure tags, other MIME-Edit operations, single-part tags, MIME-Edit
@section Operations for enclosure

Operations to make enclosure are following:

@table @kbd
@item @key{C-c C-m C-a}
Enclose specified region as multipart/alternative.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-p}
Enclose specified region as multipart/parallel.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-m}
Enclose specified region as multipart/mixed.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-d}
Enclose specified region as multipart/digest.

@item @key{C-c C-x C-s}
Digital-sign to specified region. (cf. @ref{PGP})

@item @key{C-c C-x C-e}
Encrypt to specified region. (cf. @ref{PGP})

@item @key{C-c C-x C-q}
avoid to encode tags in specified region.  In other words, tags is
interpreted as such string.  (In current version, it may be
incomplete.  Maybe PGP-signature does not work for this enclosure.)

@end table



@node other MIME-Edit operations, file-type specification, enclosure tags, MIME-Edit
@section Other operations

There are another operations in mime-edit-mode.

@table @kbd
@item @key{C-c C-c}
Send current editing message.

@item @key{C-c C-x p}
Preview current editing message. (cf. @ref{MIME-View})

@item @key{C-c C-x C-z}
Exit mime-edit-mode without sending.

@item @key{C-c C-x /}
Set current editing message to enable automatic splitting or not.
Form of automatic split messages is message/partial.

@item @key{C-c C-x 7}
Set 7bit (@ref{(mime-en)7bit}) to transfer level (@ref{transfer level}).

@item @key{C-c C-x 8}
Set 8bit (@ref{(mime-en)8bit}) to transfer level (@ref{transfer level}).

@item @key{C-c C-x v}
Set current editing message to digital-sign or not. (cf. @ref{PGP})

@item @key{C-c C-x h}
Set current editing message to encrypt or not. (cf. @ref{PGP})

@item @key{C-c C-x ?}
Display help message.

@end table



@node file-type specification, transfer level, other MIME-Edit operations, MIME-Edit
@section How to detect tag for inserted file

When @kbd{C-c C-x C-i} (@code{mime-edit-insert-file}) is pressed, tag
parameters for inserted file, such as media-type or encoding, are
detected by variable @code{mime-file-types}.@refill

When @kbd{C-u} is followed by it or parameter is not found from the
variable, it asks from user.  (When @kbd{C-u} is followed by it,
detected value is used as default value)@refill

If you want to change default value for file names, please change
variable @code{mime-file-types}.

@defvar mime-file-types

Specification of default value of tag for file name of inserted
file.@refill

It is a list of following list:

@lisp
	(FILE_PAT TYPE SUBTYPE PARAMS ENCODING
	 DISPOSITION_TYPE DISPOSITION_PARAMS)
@end lisp


Each element of the list is following:

@table @samp
@item FILE_PAT
regular expression of file name

@item TYPE
primary-type of media-type

@item SUBTYPE
subtype of media-type

@item PARAMS
parameters of Content-Type field

@item ENCODING
Content-Transfer-Encoding

@item DISPOSITION_TYPE
disposition-type

@item DISPOSITION_PARAMS
parameters of Content-Disposition field

@end table

@noindent
Example: Specify application/rtf as default media type for
@file{*.rtf}

@lisp
(eval-after-load
    "mime-edit"
  '(set-alist 'mime-file-types
	      "\\.rtf$"
	      '("application" "rtf" nil nil
		"attachment" (("filename" . file)))
	      ))
@end lisp
@end defvar



@node transfer level, message/partial sending, file-type specification, MIME-Edit
@section transfer level
@cindex transfer level

Each content inserted in a message is represented by 7bit
(@ref{(mime-en)7bit}), 8bit (@ref{(mime-en)8bit}) or binary
(@ref{(mime-en)binary}).@refill

If a message is translated by 7bit-through MTA (@ref{(mime-en)MTA}),
there is no need to encode 7bit data, but 8bit and binary data must be
encoded to 7bit data.@refill

Similarly, if a message is translated by 8bit-through MTA, there is no
need to encode 7bit or 8bit data, but binary data must be encoded to
7bit or 8bit data.@refill

@noindent
@strong{[Memo]}
@quotation
EBCDIC MTA breaks 7bit data, so in this case, 7bit data must be
encoded by base64.  But I don't know EBCDIC. (^_^;

Similarly, I wish ASCII-printable only MTA and code-conversion MTA
disappeared. (^_^;@refill

Maybe there are binary-through MTA, but I think it is not major.
@end quotation

@strong{transfer level} represents how range data are
available.  mime-edit has a variable @code{mime-transfer-level}
to represent transfer level.


@defvar mime-transfer-level

transfer level.@refill

If transfer level of a data is over it, a data is encoded to
7bit.@refill

Currently, 7 or 8 is available.  Default value is 7.@refill

In extension plan, EBCDIC will be 5, ASCII printable only will be 6,
binary will be 9.  But it will not be implemented.
@end defvar



@noindent
@strong{[Memo]}
@quotation
transfer level is only for body, not for message header (@ref{header}).
MIME extends RFC 822 (@ref{(mime-en)RFC 822}) to use 8bit data in body,
but it requires to use us-ascii (@ref{(mime-en)us-ascii}) in header.
@end quotation



@node message/partial sending,  , transfer level, MIME-Edit
@section Splitting

@defvar mime-edit-split-message

Split large message if it is non-nil.
@end defvar


@defvar mime-edit-message-default-max-lines

Default maximum lines of a message.
@end defvar


@defvar mime-edit-message-max-lines-alist

Alist of major-mode vs maximum lines of a message.@refill

If it is not specified for a major-mode,
@code{mime-edit-message-default-max-lines} is used.
@end defvar


@defvar mime-edit-split-blind-field-regexp

Regular expression to match field-name to be ignored when split sending.
@end defvar



@node Various, Concept Index, MIME-Edit, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous


@menu
* PGP::                         Encryption, Sign
* Buttons::                     Mouse button
* Acting-condition configuration::  Utility for configuration
@end menu

@node PGP, Buttons, Various, Various
@section PGP
@cindex PGP-kazu
@cindex PGP/MIME

mime-edit provides PGP encryption, signature and inserting public-key
features based on @strong{PGP/MIME} (RFC 2015) or @strong{PGP-kazu}
(draft-kazu-pgp-mime-00.txt).@refill

This feature requires your pgp command.

@defvar pgg-default-scheme

Version of PGP or GnuPG command to be used for encryption or sign.
The value should be a symbol.  Allowed versions are @code{gpg},
@code{pgp} or @code{pgp5}.@refill
@end defvar


@defvar pgg-scheme

Version of PGP or GnuPG command to be used for decryption or verification.
The value should be a symbol.  Allowed versions are @code{gpg},
@code{pgp} or @code{pgp5}.@refill
@end defvar


@defvar pgg-insert-url-function

The function to fetch public key from the keyserver.
Use Emacs/W3 by the default setting. To use emacs-w3m
instead, set as follows:
@lisp
(setq pgg-insert-url-function #'w3m-retrieve)
@end lisp
@end defvar



@node Buttons, Acting-condition configuration, PGP, Various
@section Mouse button

@defvar mime-button-face

Face used for content-button or URL-button of MIME-Preview buffer.
@end defvar


@defvar mime-button-mouse-face

Face used for MIME-preview buffer mouse highlighting.
@end defvar


@defvar mime-browse-url-function

Function to browse URL.
@end defvar



@node Acting-condition configuration,  , Buttons, Various
@section Utility for configuration

@defun mime-add-condition target-type condition  &optional  mode file

Add @var{condition} to database specified by @var{target-type}.@refill

@var{target-type} must be @code{preview} or @code{action}.@refill

If optional argument @var{mode} is @code{strict} or @code{nil}
(omitted), @var{condition} is added strictly.@refill

If optional argument @var{mode} is @code{with-default}, @var{condition}
is added with default rule.@refill

If optional argument @var{file} is specified, it is loaded when
@var{condition} is activate.
@end defun



@node Concept Index, Function Index, Various, Top
@chapter Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node Function Index, Variable Index, Concept Index, Top
@chapter Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Variable Index,  , Function Index, Top
@chapter Variable Index

@printindex vr
@bye
