@subheading asn1_get_length_der
@anchor{asn1_get_length_der}
@deftypefun {signed long} {asn1_get_length_der} (const unsigned char * @var{der}, int @var{der_len}, int * @var{len})
@var{der}: DER data to decode.

@var{der_len}: Length of DER data to decode.

@var{len}: Output variable containing the length of the DER length field.

Extract a length field from DER data.

@strong{Returns:} Return the decoded length value, or -1 on indefinite
length, or -2 when the value was too big.
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_get_tag_der
@anchor{asn1_get_tag_der}
@deftypefun {int} {asn1_get_tag_der} (const unsigned char * @var{der}, int @var{der_len}, unsigned char * @var{cls}, int * @var{len}, unsigned long * @var{tag})
@var{der}: DER data to decode.

@var{der_len}: Length of DER data to decode.

@var{cls}: Output variable containing decoded class.

@var{len}: Output variable containing the length of the DER TAG data.

@var{tag}: Output variable containing the decoded tag.

Decode the class and TAG from DER code.

@strong{Returns:} Returns @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} on success, or an error.
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_get_length_ber
@anchor{asn1_get_length_ber}
@deftypefun {signed long} {asn1_get_length_ber} (const unsigned char * @var{ber}, int @var{ber_len}, int * @var{len})
@var{ber}: BER data to decode.

@var{ber_len}: Length of BER data to decode.

@var{len}: Output variable containing the length of the BER length field.

Extract a length field from BER data.  The difference to
@code{asn1_get_length_der()} is that this function will return a length
even if the value has indefinite encoding.

@strong{Returns:} Return the decoded length value, or negative value when
the value was too big.

@strong{Since:} 2.0
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_get_octet_der
@anchor{asn1_get_octet_der}
@deftypefun {int} {asn1_get_octet_der} (const unsigned char * @var{der}, int @var{der_len}, int * @var{ret_len}, unsigned char * @var{str}, int @var{str_size}, int * @var{str_len})
@var{der}: DER data to decode containing the OCTET SEQUENCE.

@var{der_len}: Length of DER data to decode.

@var{ret_len}: Output variable containing the length of the DER data.

@var{str}: Pre-allocated output buffer to put decoded OCTET SEQUENCE in.

@var{str_size}: Length of pre-allocated output buffer.

@var{str_len}: Output variable containing the length of the OCTET SEQUENCE.

Extract an OCTET SEQUENCE from DER data.

@strong{Returns:} Returns @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} on success, or an error.
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_get_bit_der
@anchor{asn1_get_bit_der}
@deftypefun {int} {asn1_get_bit_der} (const unsigned char * @var{der}, int @var{der_len}, int * @var{ret_len}, unsigned char * @var{str}, int @var{str_size}, int * @var{bit_len})
@var{der}: DER data to decode containing the BIT SEQUENCE.

@var{der_len}: Length of DER data to decode.

@var{ret_len}: Output variable containing the length of the DER data.

@var{str}: Pre-allocated output buffer to put decoded BIT SEQUENCE in.

@var{str_size}: Length of pre-allocated output buffer.

@var{bit_len}: Output variable containing the size of the BIT SEQUENCE.

Extract a BIT SEQUENCE from DER data.

@strong{Returns:} Return @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} on success, or an error.
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_der_decoding
@anchor{asn1_der_decoding}
@deftypefun {asn1_retCode} {asn1_der_decoding} (ASN1_TYPE * @var{element}, const void * @var{ider}, int @var{len}, char * @var{errorDescription})
@var{element}: pointer to an ASN1 structure.

@var{ider}: vector that contains the DER encoding.

@var{len}: number of bytes of *@code{ider}: @code{ider}[0]..@code{ider}[len-1].

@var{errorDescription}: null-terminated string contains details when an
error occurred.

Fill the structure *@code{ELEMENT} with values of a DER encoding
string. The structure must just be created with function
@code{asn1_create_element()}.  If an error occurs during the decoding
procedure, the *@code{ELEMENT} is deleted and set equal to
@code{ASN1_TYPE_EMPTY}.

@strong{Returns:} @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} if DER encoding OK, @code{ASN1_ELEMENT_NOT_FOUND}
if @code{ELEMENT} is @code{ASN1_TYPE_EMPTY}, and @code{ASN1_TAG_ERROR} or
@code{ASN1_DER_ERROR} if the der encoding doesn't match the structure
name (*@code{ELEMENT} deleted).
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_der_decoding_element
@anchor{asn1_der_decoding_element}
@deftypefun {asn1_retCode} {asn1_der_decoding_element} (ASN1_TYPE * @var{structure}, const char * @var{elementName}, const void * @var{ider}, int @var{len}, char * @var{errorDescription})
@var{structure}: pointer to an ASN1 structure

@var{elementName}: name of the element to fill

@var{ider}: vector that contains the DER encoding of the whole structure.

@var{len}: number of bytes of *der: der[0]..der[len-1]

@var{errorDescription}: null-terminated string contains details when an
error occurred.

Fill the element named @code{ELEMENTNAME} with values of a DER encoding
string.  The structure must just be created with function
@code{asn1_create_element()}.  The DER vector must contain the encoding
string of the whole @code{STRUCTURE}.  If an error occurs during the
decoding procedure, the *@code{STRUCTURE} is deleted and set equal to
@code{ASN1_TYPE_EMPTY}.

@strong{Returns:} @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} if DER encoding OK, @code{ASN1_ELEMENT_NOT_FOUND}
if ELEMENT is @code{ASN1_TYPE_EMPTY} or @code{elementName} == NULL, and
@code{ASN1_TAG_ERROR} or @code{ASN1_DER_ERROR} if the der encoding doesn't
match the structure @code{structure} (*ELEMENT deleted).
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_der_decoding_startEnd
@anchor{asn1_der_decoding_startEnd}
@deftypefun {asn1_retCode} {asn1_der_decoding_startEnd} (ASN1_TYPE @var{element}, const void * @var{ider}, int @var{len}, const char * @var{name_element}, int * @var{start}, int * @var{end})
@var{element}: pointer to an ASN1 element

@var{ider}: vector that contains the DER encoding.

@var{len}: number of bytes of *@code{ider}: @code{ider}[0]..@code{ider}[len-1]

@var{name_element}: an element of NAME structure.

@var{start}: the position of the first byte of NAME_ELEMENT decoding
(@code{ider}[*start])

@var{end}: the position of the last byte of NAME_ELEMENT decoding
(@code{ider}[*end])

Find the start and end point of an element in a DER encoding
string. I mean that if you have a der encoding and you have already
used the function @code{asn1_der_decoding()} to fill a structure, it may
happen that you want to find the piece of string concerning an
element of the structure.

One example is the sequence "tbsCertificate" inside an X509
certificate.

@strong{Returns:} @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} if DER encoding OK, @code{ASN1_ELEMENT_NOT_FOUND}
if ELEMENT is @code{ASN1_TYPE} EMPTY or @code{name_element} is not a valid
element, @code{ASN1_TAG_ERROR} or @code{ASN1_DER_ERROR} if the der encoding
doesn't match the structure ELEMENT.
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_expand_any_defined_by
@anchor{asn1_expand_any_defined_by}
@deftypefun {asn1_retCode} {asn1_expand_any_defined_by} (ASN1_TYPE @var{definitions}, ASN1_TYPE * @var{element})
@var{definitions}: ASN1 definitions

@var{element}: pointer to an ASN1 structure

Expands every "ANY DEFINED BY" element of a structure created from
a DER decoding process (asn1_der_decoding function). The element
ANY must be defined by an OBJECT IDENTIFIER. The type used to
expand the element ANY is the first one following the definition of
the actual value of the OBJECT IDENTIFIER.

@strong{Returns:} @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} if Substitution OK, @code{ASN1_ERROR_TYPE_ANY} if
some "ANY DEFINED BY" element couldn't be expanded due to a
problem in OBJECT_ID -> TYPE association, or other error codes
depending on DER decoding.
@end deftypefun

@subheading asn1_expand_octet_string
@anchor{asn1_expand_octet_string}
@deftypefun {asn1_retCode} {asn1_expand_octet_string} (ASN1_TYPE @var{definitions}, ASN1_TYPE * @var{element}, const char * @var{octetName}, const char * @var{objectName})
@var{definitions}: ASN1 definitions

@var{element}: pointer to an ASN1 structure

@var{octetName}: name of the OCTECT STRING field to expand.

@var{objectName}: name of the OBJECT IDENTIFIER field to use to define
the type for expansion.

Expands an "OCTET STRING" element of a structure created from a DER
decoding process (the @code{asn1_der_decoding()} function).  The type used
for expansion is the first one following the definition of the
actual value of the OBJECT IDENTIFIER indicated by OBJECTNAME.

@strong{Returns:} @code{ASN1_SUCCESS} if substitution OK, @code{ASN1_ELEMENT_NOT_FOUND}
if @code{objectName} or @code{octetName} are not correct,
@code{ASN1_VALUE_NOT_VALID} if it wasn't possible to find the type to
use for expansion, or other errors depending on DER decoding.
@end deftypefun

