@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@page
@node Lists, Arrays, Constants, Data Types and Structures
@section Lists
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Introduction to Lists::
* Functions and Variables for Lists::
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Introduction to Lists, Functions and Variables for Lists, Lists, Lists
@subsection Introduction to Lists
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lists are the basic building block for Maxima and Lisp.  All data types
other than arrays, hash tables, numbers are represented as Lisp lists,
These Lisp lists have the form

@example
((MPLUS) $A 2)
@end example

@noindent
to indicate an expression @code{a+2}.  At Maxima level one would see
the infix notation @code{a+2}.  Maxima also has lists which are printed
as

@example
[1, 2, 7, x+y]
@end example

@noindent
for a list with 4 elements.  Internally this corresponds to a Lisp list
of the form

@example
((MLIST) 1  2  7  ((MPLUS)  $X $Y ))
@end example

@noindent
The flag which denotes the type field of the Maxima expression is a list
itself, since after it has been through the simplifier the list would become

@example
((MLIST SIMP) 1 2 7 ((MPLUS SIMP) $X $Y))
@end example

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Functions and Variables for Lists,  , Introduction to Lists, Lists
@subsection Functions and Variables for Lists
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{[}
@anchor{]}
@defvr  {Operator} [
@defvrx {Operator} ]
@ifinfo
@fnindex List delimiters
@fnindex Subscript operator
@end ifinfo

@code{[} and @code{]} mark the beginning and end, respectively, of a list.

@code{[} and @code{]} also enclose the subscripts of
a list, array, hash array, or array function.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c x: [a, b, c];
@c x[3];
@c array (y, fixnum, 3);
@c y[2]: %pi;
@c y[2];
@c z['foo]: 'bar;
@c z['foo];
@c g[k] := 1/(k^2+1);
@c g[10];
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) x: [a, b, c];
(%o1)                       [a, b, c]
@end group
@group
(%i2) x[3];
(%o2)                           c
@end group
@group
(%i3) array (y, fixnum, 3);
(%o3)                           y
@end group
@group
(%i4) y[2]: %pi;
(%o4)                          %pi
@end group
@group
(%i5) y[2];
(%o5)                          %pi
@end group
@group
(%i6) z['foo]: 'bar;
(%o6)                          bar
@end group
@group
(%i7) z['foo];
(%o7)                          bar
@end group
@group
(%i8) g[k] := 1/(k^2+1);
                                  1
(%o8)                     g  := ------
                           k     2
                                k  + 1
@end group
@group
(%i9) g[10];
                                1
(%o9)                          ---
                               101
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Operators}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEED ANOTHER deffn FOR GENERAL EXPRESSIONS ARGUMENTS
@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION AND EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{append}
@deffn {Function} append (@var{list_1}, @dots{}, @var{list_n})

Returns a single list of the elements of @var{list_1} followed
by the elements of @var{list_2}, @dots{}  @code{append} also works on
general expressions, e.g. @code{append (f(a,b), f(c,d,e));} yields
@code{f(a,b,c,d,e)}.

Do @code{example(append);} for an example.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION AND EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{assoc}
@deffn  {Function} assoc (@var{key}, @var{list}, @var{default})
@deffnx {Function} assoc (@var{key}, @var{list})

This function searches for the @var{key} in the left hand side of the input
@var{list} of the form @code{[x,y,z,...]} where each of the @var{list} elements
is an expression of a binary operand and 2 elements.  For example @code{x=1},
@code{2^3}, @code{[a,b]} etc.  The @var{key} is checked against the first
operand.  @code{assoc} returns the second operand if the @code{key} is found.
If the @code{key} is not found it either returns the @var{default} value.
@var{default} is optional and defaults to @code{false}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEED ANOTHER deffn FOR GENERAL EXPRESSIONS ARGUMENTS
@c SPLIT OFF EXAMPLES INTO EXAMPLE SECTION

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{cons}
@deffn {Function} cons (@var{expr}, @var{list})

Returns a new list constructed of the element @var{expr} as its first element,
followed by the elements of @var{list}.  @code{cons} also works on other
expressions, e.g. @code{cons(x, f(a,b,c));}  ->  @code{f(x,a,b,c)}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{copylist}
@deffn {Function} copylist (@var{list})

Returns a copy of the list @var{list}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{create_list}
@deffn {Function} create_list (@var{form}, @var{x_1}, @var{list_1}, @dots{}, @var{x_n}, @var{list_n})

Create a list by evaluating @var{form} with @var{x_1} bound to
each element of @var{list_1}, and for each such binding bind @var{x_2}
to each element of @var{list_2}, @dots{}
The number of elements in the result will be
the product of the number of elements in each list.
Each variable @var{x_i} must actually be a symbol -- it will not be evaluated.
The list arguments will be evaluated once at the beginning of the
iteration.

@c ===beg===
@c create_list (x^i, i, [1, 3, 7]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) create_list (x^i, i, [1, 3, 7]);
                                3   7
(%o1)                      [x, x , x ]
@end group
@end example

@noindent
With a double iteration:

@c ===beg===
@c create_list ([i, j], i, [a, b], j, [e, f, h]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) create_list ([i, j], i, [a, b], j, [e, f, h]);
(%o1)   [[a, e], [a, f], [a, h], [b, e], [b, f], [b, h]]
@end group
@end example

Instead of @var{list_i} two args may be supplied each of which should
evaluate to a number.  These will be the inclusive lower and
upper bounds for the iteration.

@c ===beg===
@c create_list ([i, j], i, [1, 2, 3], j, 1, i);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) create_list ([i, j], i, [1, 2, 3], j, 1, i);
(%o1)   [[1, 1], [2, 1], [2, 2], [3, 1], [3, 2], [3, 3]]
@end group
@end example

Note that the limits or list for the @code{j} variable can
depend on the current value of @code{i}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{delete}
@deffn  {Function} delete (@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2})
@deffnx {Function} delete (@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2}, @var{n})

@code{delete(@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2})}
removes from @var{expr_2} any arguments of its top-level operator
which are the same (as determined by "=") as @var{expr_1}.
Note that "=" tests for formal equality, not equivalence.
Note also that arguments of subexpressions are not affected.

@var{expr_1} may be an atom or a non-atomic expression.
@var{expr_2} may be any non-atomic expression.
@code{delete} returns a new expression;
it does not modify @var{expr_2}.

@code{delete(@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2}, @var{n})}
removes from @var{expr_2} the first @var{n} arguments of the top-level operator
which are the same as @var{expr_1}.
If there are fewer than @var{n} such arguments,
then all such arguments are removed.

Examples:

Removing elements from a list.

@c ===beg===
@c delete (y, [w, x, y, z, z, y, x, w]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) delete (y, [w, x, y, z, z, y, x, w]);
(%o1)                  [w, x, z, z, x, w]
@end group
@end example

Removing terms from a sum.

@c ===beg===
@c delete (sin(x), x + sin(x) + y);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) delete (sin(x), x + sin(x) + y);
(%o1)                         y + x
@end group
@end example

Removing factors from a product.

@c ===beg===
@c delete (u - x, (u - w)*(u - x)*(u - y)*(u - z));
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) delete (u - x, (u - w)*(u - x)*(u - y)*(u - z));
(%o1)                (u - w) (u - y) (u - z)
@end group
@end example

Removing arguments from an arbitrary expression.

@c ===beg===
@c delete (a, foo (a, b, c, d, a));
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) delete (a, foo (a, b, c, d, a));
(%o1)                     foo(b, c, d)
@end group
@end example

Limit the number of removed arguments.

@c ===beg===
@c delete (a, foo (a, b, a, c, d, a), 2);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) delete (a, foo (a, b, a, c, d, a), 2);
(%o1)                    foo(b, c, d, a)
@end group
@end example

Whether arguments are the same as @var{expr_1} is determined by "=".
Arguments which are @code{equal} but not "=" are not removed.

@c ===beg===
@c [is (equal (0, 0)), is (equal (0, 0.0)), is (equal (0, 0b0))];
@c [is (0 = 0), is (0 = 0.0), is (0 = 0b0)];
@c delete (0, [0, 0.0, 0b0]);
@c is (equal ((x + y)*(x - y), x^2 - y^2));
@c is ((x + y)*(x - y) = x^2 - y^2);
@c delete ((x + y)*(x - y), [(x + y)*(x - y), x^2 - y^2]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) [is (equal (0, 0)), is (equal (0, 0.0)), is (equal (0, 0b0))];
rat: replaced 0.0 by 0/1 = 0.0
`rat' replaced 0.0B0 by 0/1 = 0.0B0
(%o1)                  [true, true, true]
@end group
@group
(%i2) [is (0 = 0), is (0 = 0.0), is (0 = 0b0)];
(%o2)                 [true, false, false]
@end group
@group
(%i3) delete (0, [0, 0.0, 0b0]);
(%o3)                     [0.0, 0.0b0]
@end group
@group
(%i4) is (equal ((x + y)*(x - y), x^2 - y^2));
(%o4)                         true
@end group
@group
(%i5) is ((x + y)*(x - y) = x^2 - y^2);
(%o5)                         false
@end group
@group
(%i6) delete ((x + y)*(x - y), [(x + y)*(x - y), x^2 - y^2]);
                              2    2
(%o6)                       [x  - y ]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{eighth}
@deffn {Function} eighth (@var{expr})

Returns the 8'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEED ANOTHER deffn FOR GENERAL EXPRESSIONS ARGUMENTS
@c SPLIT OFF EXAMPLES INTO EXAMPLE SECTION

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{endcons}
@deffn {Function} endcons (@var{expr}, @var{list})

Returns a new list consisting of the elements of @code{list} followed by
@var{expr}.  @code{endcons} also works on general expressions, e.g.
@code{endcons(x, f(a,b,c));}  ->  @code{f(a,b,c,x)}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{fifth}
@deffn {Function} fifth (@var{expr})

Returns the 5'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION AND EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{first}
@deffn {Function} first (@var{expr})

Returns the first part of @var{expr} which may result in the first element of a
list, the first row of a matrix, the first term of a sum, etc.  Note that
@code{first} and its related functions, @code{rest} and @code{last}, work
on the form of @var{expr} which is displayed not the form which is typed on
input.  If the variable @mref{inflag} is set to @code{true} however, these
functions will look at the internal form of @var{expr}.  Note that the
simplifier re-orders expressions.  Thus @code{first(x+y)} will be @code{x} if
@code{inflag} is @code{true} and @code{y} if @code{inflag} is @code{false}
(@code{first(y+x)} gives the same results).  The functions @code{second} @dots{}
@code{tenth} yield the second through the tenth part of their input argument.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{fourth}
@deffn {Function} fourth (@var{expr})

Returns the 4'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{join}
@deffn {Function} join (@var{l}, @var{m})

Creates a new list containing the elements of lists @var{l} and @var{m},
interspersed.  The result has elements @code{[@var{l}[1], @var{m}[1],
@var{l}[2], @var{m}[2], ...]}.  The lists @var{l} and @var{m} may contain any
type of elements.

If the lists are different lengths, @code{join} ignores elements of the longer
list.

Maxima complains if @var{l} or @var{m} is not a list.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c L1: [a, sin(b), c!, d - 1];
@c join (L1, [1, 2, 3, 4]);
@c join (L1, [aa, bb, cc, dd, ee, ff]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L1: [a, sin(b), c!, d - 1];
(%o1)                [a, sin(b), c!, d - 1]
@end group
@group
(%i2) join (L1, [1, 2, 3, 4]);
(%o2)          [a, 1, sin(b), 2, c!, 3, d - 1, 4]
@end group
@group
(%i3) join (L1, [aa, bb, cc, dd, ee, ff]);
(%o3)        [a, aa, sin(b), bb, c!, cc, d - 1, dd]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES
@c HOW IS "LAST" PART DETERMINED ??

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{last}
@deffn {Function} last (@var{expr})

Returns the last part (term, row, element, etc.) of the @var{expr}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION AND EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{length}
@deffn {Function} length (@var{expr})

Returns (by default) the number of parts in the external
(displayed) form of @var{expr}.  For lists this is the number of elements,
for matrices it is the number of rows, and for sums it is the number
of terms (see @mref{dispform}).

The @code{length} command is affected by the @mref{inflag} switch.  So, e.g.
@code{length(a/(b*c));} gives 2 if @code{inflag} is @code{false} (Assuming
@mref{exptdispflag} is @code{true}), but 3 if @code{inflag} is @code{true} (the
internal representation is essentially @code{a*b^-1*c^-1}).

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{listarith}
@defvr {Option variable} listarith
Default value: @code{true} 

If @code{false} causes any arithmetic operations with lists to be suppressed;
when @code{true}, list-matrix operations are contagious causing lists to be
converted to matrices yielding a result which is always a matrix.  However,
list-list operations should return lists.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Global flags}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@deffn {Function} listp (@var{expr})

Returns @code{true} if @var{expr} is a list else @code{false}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Predicate functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{makelist}
@deffn  {Function} makelist ()
@deffnx {Function} makelist (@var{expr}, @var{n})
@deffnx {Function} makelist (@var{expr}, @var{i}, @var{i_max})
@deffnx {Function} makelist (@var{expr}, @var{i}, @var{i_0}, @var{i_max})
@deffnx {Function} makelist (@var{expr}, @var{i}, @var{i_0}, @var{i_max}, @var{step})
@deffnx {Function} makelist (@var{expr}, @var{x}, @var{list})

The first form, @code{makelist ()}, creates an empty list. The second form,
@code{makelist (@var{expr})}, creates a list with @var{expr} as its single
element. @code{makelist (@var{expr}, @var{n})} creates a list of @var{n}
elements generated from @var{expr}.

The most general form, @code{makelist (@var{expr}, @var{i}, @var{i_0},
@var{i_max}, @var{step})}, returns the list of elements obtained when
@code{ev (@var{expr}, @var{i}=@var{j})} is applied to the elements
@var{j} of the sequence: @var{i_0}, @var{i_0} + @var{step}, @var{i_0} +
2*@var{step}, ..., with @var{|j|} less than or equal to @var{|i_max|}.

The increment @var{step} can be a number (positive or negative) or an
expression. If it is omitted, the default value 1 will be used. If both
@var{i_0} and @var{step} are omitted, they will both have a default
value of 1.

@code{makelist (@var{expr}, @var{x}, @var{list})} returns a list, the
@code{j}'th element of which is equal to
@code{ev (@var{expr}, @var{x}=@var{list}[j])} for @code{j} equal to 1 through
@code{length (@var{list})}.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c makelist (concat (x,i), i, 6);
@c makelist (x=y, y, [a, b, c]);
@c makelist (x^2, x, 3, 2*%pi, 2);
@c makelist (random(6), 4);
@c flatten (makelist (makelist (i^2, 3), i, 4));
@c flatten (makelist (makelist (i^2, i, 3), 4));
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) makelist (concat (x,i), i, 6);
(%o1)               [x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6]
@end group
@group
(%i2) makelist (x=y, y, [a, b, c]);
(%o2)                 [x = a, x = b, x = c]
@end group
@group
(%i3) makelist (x^2, x, 3, 2*%pi, 2);
(%o3)                        [9, 25]
@end group
@group
(%i4) makelist (random(6), 4);
(%o4)                     [2, 0, 2, 5]
@end group
@group
(%i5) flatten (makelist (makelist (i^2, 3), i, 4));
(%o5)        [1, 1, 1, 4, 4, 4, 9, 9, 9, 16, 16, 16]
@end group
@group
(%i6) flatten (makelist (makelist (i^2, i, 3), 4));
(%o6)         [1, 4, 9, 1, 4, 9, 1, 4, 9, 1, 4, 9]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{member}
@deffn {Function} member (@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2})

Returns @code{true} if @code{is(@var{expr_1} = @var{a})}
for some element @var{a} in @code{args(@var{expr_2})},
otherwise returns @code{false}.

@code{expr_2} is typically a list, in which case
@code{args(@var{expr_2}) = @var{expr_2}} and @code{is(@var{expr_1} = @var{a})}
for some element @var{a} in @code{expr_2} is the test.

@code{member} does not inspect parts of the arguments of @code{expr_2}, so it
may return @code{false} even if @code{expr_1} is a part of some argument of
@code{expr_2}.

See also @mrefdot{elementp}

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c member (8, [8, 8.0, 8b0]);
@c member (8, [8.0, 8b0]);
@c member (b, [a, b, c]);
@c member (b, [[a, b], [b, c]]);
@c member ([b, c], [[a, b], [b, c]]);
@c F (1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8);
@c member (1/8, %);
@c member ("ab", ["aa", "ab", sin(1), a + b]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) member (8, [8, 8.0, 8b0]);
(%o1)                         true
@end group
@group
(%i2) member (8, [8.0, 8b0]);
(%o2)                         false
@end group
@group
(%i3) member (b, [a, b, c]);
(%o3)                         true
@end group
@group
(%i4) member (b, [[a, b], [b, c]]);
(%o4)                         false
@end group
@group
(%i5) member ([b, c], [[a, b], [b, c]]);
(%o5)                         true
@end group
@group
(%i6) F (1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8);
                               1  1  1
(%o6)                     F(1, -, -, -)
                               2  4  8
@end group
@group
(%i7) member (1/8, %);
(%o7)                         true
@end group
@group
(%i8) member ("ab", ["aa", "ab", sin(1), a + b]);
(%o8)                         true
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions} @category{Predicate functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{ninth}
@deffn {Function} ninth (@var{expr})

Returns the 9'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{pop}
@deffn {Function} pop (@var{list})

@code{pop} removes the first element from the list @var{list} and returns this 
element.  @var{list} must be a symbol, which is bound to a list and not the list
itself.

If the argument @var{list} is not bound to a list or the list is empty, Maxima
generates an error message.

See also @mref{push} for examples.

To use this function, the additional package "basic" must be loaded
first: @code{load("basic")}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{push}
@deffn {Function} push (@var{item}, @var{list})

@code{push} prepends the item @var{item} to the list @var{list} and returns a
copy of the new list.  @var{list} must be a symbol, which is bound to a list and
not the list itself.  @var{item} can be any Maxima symbol or expression.

If the argument @var{list} is not bound to a list, Maxima generates an error
message.

See also @mref{pop} to remove the first item from a list.

@code{load("basic")} loads this function.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c load ("basic")$
@c ll: [];
@c push (x, ll);
@c push (x^2+y, ll);
@c a: push ("string", ll);
@c pop (ll);
@c pop (ll);
@c pop (ll);
@c ll;
@c a;
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) load ("basic")$
@group
(%i2) ll: [];
(%o2)                          []
@end group
@group
(%i3) push (x, ll);
(%o3)                          [x]
@end group
@group
(%i4) push (x^2+y, ll);
                                 2
(%o4)                      [y + x , x]
@end group
@group
(%i5) a: push ("string", ll);
                                     2
(%o5)                  [string, y + x , x]
@end group
@group
(%i6) pop (ll);
(%o6)                        string
@end group
@group
(%i7) pop (ll);
                                  2
(%o7)                        y + x
@end group
@group
(%i8) pop (ll);
(%o8)                           x
@end group
@group
(%i9) ll;
(%o9)                          []
@end group
@group
(%i10) a;
                                     2
(%o10)                 [string, y + x , x]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{rest}
@deffn  {Function} rest (@var{expr}, @var{n})
@deffnx {Function} rest (@var{expr})

Returns @var{expr} with its first @var{n} elements removed if @var{n} is
positive and its last @code{- @var{n}} elements removed if @var{n} is negative.
If @var{n} is 1 it may be omitted.  @var{expr} may be a list, matrix, or other
expression.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEED ANOTHER deffn FOR GENERAL EXPRESSIONS ARGUMENTS
@c SPLIT OFF EXAMPLES INTO EXAMPLE SECTION

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{reverse}
@deffn {Function} reverse (@var{list})

Reverses the order of the members of the @var{list} (not
the members themselves).  @code{reverse} also works on general expressions,
e.g.  @code{reverse(a=b);} gives @code{b=a}.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{second}
@deffn {Function} second (@var{expr})

Returns the 2'nd item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{seventh}
@deffn {Function} seventh (@var{expr})

Returns the 7'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{sixth}
@deffn {Function} sixth (@var{expr})

Returns the 6'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{sort}
@deffn  {Function} sort (@var{L}, @var{P})
@deffnx {Function} sort (@var{L})

@code{sort(@var{L}, @var{P})} sorts a list @var{L} according to a predicate @code{P} of two arguments
which defines a strict weak order on the elements of @var{L}.
If @code{@var{P}(a, b)} is @code{true}, then @code{a} appears before @code{b} in the result.
If neither @code{@var{P}(a, b)} nor @code{@var{P}(b, a)} are @code{true},
then @code{a} and @code{b} are equivalent, and appear in the result in the same order as in the input.
That is, @code{sort} is a stable sort.

If @code{@var{P}(a, b)} and @code{@var{P}(b, a)} are both @code{true} for some elements of @var{L},
then @var{P} is not a valid sort predicate, and the result is undefined.
If @code{@var{P}(a, b)} is something other than @code{true} or @code{false}, @code{sort} signals an error.

The predicate may be specified as the name of a function 
or binary infix operator, or as a @code{lambda} expression.  If specified as
the name of an operator, the name must be enclosed in double quotes.

The sorted list is returned as a new object; the argument @var{L} is not modified.

@code{sort(@var{L})} is equivalent to @code{sort(@var{L}, orderlessp)}.

The default sorting order is ascending, as determined by @mrefdot{orderlessp} The predicate @code{ordergreatp} sorts a list in descending order.

All Maxima atoms and expressions are comparable under @code{orderlessp} and @code{ordergreatp}.

Operators @code{<} and @code{>} order numbers, constants, and constant expressions by magnitude.
Note that @code{orderlessp} and @code{ordergreatp} do not order numbers, constants, and constant expressions by magnitude.

@code{ordermagnitudep} orders numbers, constants, and constant expressions the same as @code{<},
and all other elements the same as @code{orderlessp}.

Examples:

@code{sort} sorts a list according to a predicate of two arguments
which defines a strict weak order on the elements of the list.

@c ===beg===
@c sort ([1, a, b, 2, 3, c], 'orderlessp);
@c sort ([1, a, b, 2, 3, c], 'ordergreatp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) sort ([1, a, b, 2, 3, c], 'orderlessp);
(%o1)                  [1, 2, 3, a, b, c]
(%i2) sort ([1, a, b, 2, 3, c], 'ordergreatp);
(%o2)                  [c, b, a, 3, 2, 1]
@end group
@end example

The predicate may be specified as the name of a function 
or binary infix operator, or as a @code{lambda} expression.  If specified as
the name of an operator, the name must be enclosed in double quotes.

@c ===beg===
@c L : [[1, x], [3, y], [4, w], [2, z]];
@c foo (a, b) := a[1] > b[1];
@c sort (L, 'foo);
@c infix (">>");
@c a >> b := a[1] > b[1];
@c sort (L, ">>");
@c sort (L, lambda ([a, b], a[1] > b[1]));
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L : [[1, x], [3, y], [4, w], [2, z]];
(%o1)           [[1, x], [3, y], [4, w], [2, z]]
(%i2) foo (a, b) := a[1] > b[1];
(%o2)                 foo(a, b) := a  > b
                                    1    1
(%i3) sort (L, 'foo);
(%o3)           [[4, w], [3, y], [2, z], [1, x]]
(%i4) infix (">>");
(%o4)                          >>
(%i5) a >> b := a[1] > b[1];
(%o5)                   a >> b := a  > b
                                   1    1
(%i6) sort (L, ">>");
(%o6)           [[4, w], [3, y], [2, z], [1, x]]
(%i7) sort (L, lambda ([a, b], a[1] > b[1]));
(%o7)           [[4, w], [3, y], [2, z], [1, x]]
@end group
@end example

@code{sort(@var{L})} is equivalent to @code{sort(@var{L}, orderlessp)}.

@c ===beg===
@c L : [a, 2*b, -5, 7, 1 + %e, %pi];
@c sort (L);
@c sort (L, 'orderlessp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L : [a, 2*b, -5, 7, 1 + %e, %pi];
(%o1)             [a, 2 b, - 5, 7, %e + 1, %pi]
(%i2) sort (L);
(%o2)             [- 5, 7, %e + 1, %pi, a, 2 b]
(%i3) sort (L, 'orderlessp);
(%o3)             [- 5, 7, %e + 1, %pi, a, 2 b]
@end group
@end example

The default sorting order is ascending, as determined by @mrefdot{orderlessp} The predicate @code{ordergreatp} sorts a list in descending order.

@c ===beg===
@c L : [a, 2*b, -5, 7, 1 + %e, %pi];
@c sort (L);
@c sort (L, 'ordergreatp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L : [a, 2*b, -5, 7, 1 + %e, %pi];
(%o1)                    [a, 2 b, - 5, 7, %e + 1, %pi]
(%i2) sort (L);
(%o2)                    [- 5, 7, %e + 1, %pi, a, 2 b]
(%i3) sort (L, 'ordergreatp);
(%o3)                    [2 b, a, %pi, %e + 1, 7, - 5]
@end group
@end example

All Maxima atoms and expressions are comparable under @code{orderlessp} and @code{ordergreatp}.

@c ===beg===
@c L : [11, -17, 29b0, 9*c, 7.55, foo(x, y), -5/2, b + a];
@c sort (L, orderlessp);
@c sort (L, ordergreatp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L : [11, -17, 29b0, 9*c, 7.55, foo(x, y), -5/2, b + a];
                                                 5
(%o1)  [11, - 17, 2.9b1, 9 c, 7.55, foo(x, y), - -, b + a]
                                                 2
(%i2) sort (L, orderlessp);
                5
(%o2)  [- 17, - -, 7.55, 11, 2.9b1, b + a, 9 c, foo(x, y)]
                2
(%i3) sort (L, ordergreatp);
                                                  5
(%o3)  [foo(x, y), 9 c, b + a, 2.9b1, 11, 7.55, - -, - 17]
                                                  2
@end group
@end example

Operators @code{<} and @code{>} order numbers, constants, and constant expressions by magnitude.
Note that @code{orderlessp} and @code{ordergreatp} do not order numbers, constants, and constant expressions by magnitude.

@c ===beg===
@c L : [%pi, 3, 4, %e, %gamma];
@c sort (L, ">");
@c sort (L, ordergreatp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L : [%pi, 3, 4, %e, %gamma];
(%o1)                [%pi, 3, 4, %e, %gamma]
(%i2) sort (L, ">");
(%o2)                [4, %pi, 3, %e, %gamma]
(%i3) sort (L, ordergreatp);
(%o3)                [%pi, %gamma, %e, 4, 3]
@end group
@end example

@code{ordermagnitudep} orders numbers, constants, and constant expressions the same as @code{<},
and all other elements the same as @code{orderlessp}.

@c ===beg===
@c L : [%i, 1+%i, 2*x, minf, inf, %e, sin(1), 0, 1, 2, 3, 1.0, 1.0b0];
@c sort (L, ordermagnitudep);
@c sort (L, orderlessp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L : [%i, 1+%i, 2*x, minf, inf, %e, sin(1), 0, 1, 2, 3, 1.0, 1.0b0];
(%o1) [%i, %i + 1, 2 x, minf, inf, %e, sin(1), 0, 1, 2, 3, 1.0, 
                                                           1.0b0]
(%i2) sort (L, ordermagnitudep);
(%o2) [minf, 0, sin(1), 1, 1.0, 1.0b0, 2, %e, 3, inf, %i, 
                                                     %i + 1, 2 x]
(%i3) sort (L, orderlessp);
(%o3) [0, 1, 1.0, 2, 3, %e, %i, %i + 1, inf, minf, sin(1), 
                                                      1.0b0, 2 x]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{sublist}
@deffn {Function} sublist (@var{list}, @var{p})

Returns the list of elements of @var{list} for which the predicate @code{p}
returns @code{true}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c L: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
@c sublist (L, evenp);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) L: [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
(%o1)                  [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
@end group
@group
(%i2) sublist (L, evenp);
(%o2)                       [2, 4, 6]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{sublist_indices}
@deffn {Function} sublist_indices (@var{L}, @var{P})

Returns the indices of the elements @code{x} of the list @var{L} for which
the predicate @code{maybe(@var{P}(x))} returns @code{true};
this excludes @code{unknown} as well as @code{false}.
@var{P} may be the name of a function or a lambda expression.
@var{L} must be a literal list.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c sublist_indices ('[a, b, b, c, 1, 2, b, 3, b], 
@c                        lambda ([x], x='b));
@c sublist_indices ('[a, b, b, c, 1, 2, b, 3, b], symbolp);
@c sublist_indices ([1 > 0, 1 < 0, 2 < 1, 2 > 1, 2 > 0], 
@c                        identity);
@c assume (x < -1);
@c map (maybe, [x > 0, x < 0, x < -2]);
@c sublist_indices ([x > 0, x < 0, x < -2], identity);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) sublist_indices ('[a, b, b, c, 1, 2, b, 3, b],
                       lambda ([x], x='b));
(%o1)                     [2, 3, 7, 9]
@end group
@group
(%i2) sublist_indices ('[a, b, b, c, 1, 2, b, 3, b], symbolp);
(%o2)                  [1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 9]
@end group
@group
(%i3) sublist_indices ([1 > 0, 1 < 0, 2 < 1, 2 > 1, 2 > 0],
                       identity);
(%o3)                       [1, 4, 5]
@end group
@group
(%i4) assume (x < -1);
(%o4)                       [x < - 1]
@end group
@group
(%i5) map (maybe, [x > 0, x < 0, x < -2]);
(%o5)                [false, true, unknown]
@end group
@group
(%i6) sublist_indices ([x > 0, x < 0, x < -2], identity);
(%o6)                          [2]
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Lists}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{unique}
@deffn {Function} unique (@var{L})

Returns the unique elements of the list @var{L}.

When all the elements of @var{L} are unique,
@code{unique} returns a shallow copy of @var{L},
not @var{L} itself.

If @var{L} is not a list, @code{unique} returns @var{L}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c unique ([1, %pi, a + b, 2, 1, %e, %pi, a + b, [1]]);
@c ===end===
@example
@group
(%i1) unique ([1, %pi, a + b, 2, 1, %e, %pi, a + b, [1]]);
(%o1)              [1, 2, %e, %pi, [1], b + a]
@end group
@end example
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{tenth}
@deffn {Function} tenth (@var{expr})

Returns the 10'th item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{third}
@deffn {Function} third (@var{expr})

Returns the 3'rd item of expression or list @var{expr}.
See @mref{first} for more details.

@opencatbox
@category{Lists} @category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

