@menu
* Functions and Variables for Simplification::  
@end menu

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node Functions and Variables for Simplification,  , Simplification, Simplification
@section Functions and Variables for Simplification
@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{additive}
@defvr {Property} additive

If @code{declare(f,additive)} has been executed, then:

(1) If @code{f} is univariate, whenever the simplifier encounters @code{f}
applied to a sum, @code{f} will be distributed over that sum.  I.e.
@code{f(y+x)} will simplify to @code{f(y)+f(x)}.

(2) If @code{f} is a function of 2 or more arguments, additivity is defined as
additivity in the first argument to @code{f}, as in the case of @code{sum} or
@code{integrate}, i.e.  @code{f(h(x)+g(x),x)} will simplify to
@code{f(h(x),x)+f(g(x),x)}.  This simplification does not occur when @code{f} is
applied to expressions of the form @code{sum(x[i],i,lower-limit,upper-limit)}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c F3 (a + b + c);
@c declare (F3, additive);
@c F3 (a + b + c);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) F3 (a + b + c);
(%o1)                     F3(c + b + a)
(%i2) declare (F3, additive);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) F3 (a + b + c);
(%o3)                 F3(c) + F3(b) + F3(a)
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Operators} @category{Declarations and inferences}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{antisymmetric}
@defvr {Property} antisymmetric

If @code{declare(h,antisymmetric)} is done, this tells the simplifier that
@code{h} is antisymmetric.  E.g.  @code{h(x,z,y)} will simplify to 
@code{- h(x, y, z)}.  That is, it will give (-1)^n times the result given by
@code{symmetric} or @code{commutative}, where n is the number of interchanges
of two arguments necessary to convert it to that form.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c S (b, a);
@c declare (S, symmetric);
@c S (b, a);
@c S (a, c, e, d, b);
@c T (b, a);
@c declare (T, antisymmetric);
@c T (b, a);
@c T (a, c, e, d, b);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) S (b, a);
(%o1)                        S(b, a)
(%i2) declare (S, symmetric);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) S (b, a);
(%o3)                        S(a, b)
(%i4) S (a, c, e, d, b);
(%o4)                   S(a, b, c, d, e)
(%i5) T (b, a);
(%o5)                        T(b, a)
(%i6) declare (T, antisymmetric);
(%o6)                         done
(%i7) T (b, a);
(%o7)                       - T(a, b)
(%i8) T (a, c, e, d, b);
(%o8)                   T(a, b, c, d, e)
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Operators} @category{Declarations and inferences}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@deffn {Function} combine (@var{expr})

Simplifies the sum @var{expr} by combining terms with the same
denominator into a single term.

@c NEED EXAMPLE HERE
@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{commutative}
@defvr {Property} commutative

If @code{declare(h, commutative)} is done, this tells the simplifier that
@code{h} is a commutative function.  E.g.  @code{h(x, z, y)} will simplify to
@code{h(x, y, z)}.  This is the same as @code{symmetric}.

@opencatbox
@category{Operators} @category{Declarations and inferences}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{demoivre}
@deffn  {Function} demoivre (@var{expr})
@deffnx {Option variable} demoivre

The function @code{demoivre (expr)} converts one expression
without setting the global variable @code{demoivre}.

When the variable @code{demoivre} is @code{true}, complex exponentials are
converted into equivalent expressions in terms of circular functions:
@code{exp (a + b*%i)} simplifies to @code{%e^a * (cos(b) + %i*sin(b))}
if @code{b} is free of @code{%i}.  @code{a} and @code{b} are not expanded.

The default value of @code{demoivre} is @code{false}.

@code{exponentialize} converts circular and hyperbolic functions to exponential
form.  @code{demoivre} and @code{exponentialize} cannot both be true at the same
time.

@opencatbox
@category{Complex variables} @category{Trigonometric functions} @category{Hyperbolic functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS WORK

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{function_distrib}
@deffn {Function} distrib (@var{expr})

Distributes sums over products.  It differs from @code{expand} in that it works
at only the top level of an expression, i.e., it doesn't recurse and it is
faster than @code{expand}.  It differs from @code{multthru} in that it expands
all sums at that level.

Examples:

@example
(%i1) distrib ((a+b) * (c+d));
(%o1)                 b d + a d + b c + a c
(%i2) multthru ((a+b) * (c+d));
(%o2)                 (b + a) d + (b + a) c
(%i3) distrib (1/((a+b) * (c+d)));
                                1
(%o3)                    ---------------
                         (b + a) (d + c)
(%i4) expand (1/((a+b) * (c+d)), 1, 0);
                                1
(%o4)                 ---------------------
                      b d + a d + b c + a c
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{distribute_over}
@defvr {Option variable} distribute_over
Default value: @code{true}

@code{distribute_over} controls the mapping of functions over bags like lists, 
matrices, and equations.  At this time not all Maxima functions have this 
property.  It is possible to look up this property with the command
@code{properties}.

The mapping of functions is switched off, when setting @code{distribute_over} 
to the value @code{false}.

Examples:

The @code{sin} function maps over a list:

@c ===beg===
@c sin([x,1,1.0]);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) sin([x,1,1.0]);
(%o1)                 [sin(x), sin(1), .8414709848078965]
@end example

@code{mod} is a function with two arguments which maps over lists.  Mapping over 
nested lists is possible too:

@c ===beg===
@c mod([x,11,2*a],10);
@c mod([[x,y,z],11,2*a],10);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i2) mod([x,11,2*a],10);
(%o2)                    [mod(x, 10), 1, 2 mod(a, 5)]
(%i3) mod([[x,y,z],11,2*a],10);
(%o3)       [[mod(x, 10), mod(y, 10), mod(z, 10)], 1, 2 mod(a, 5)]
@end example

Mapping of the @code{floor} function over a matrix and an equation:

@c ===beg===
@c floor(matrix([a,b],[c,d]));
@c floor(a=b);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i4) floor(matrix([a,b],[c,d]));
                            [ floor(a)  floor(b) ]
(%o4)                       [                    ]
                            [ floor(c)  floor(d) ]
(%i5) floor(a=b);
(%o5)                         floor(a) = floor(b)
@end example

Functions with more than one argument map over any of the arguments or all
arguments:

@c ===beg===
@c expintegral_e([1,2],[x,y]);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i6) expintegral_e([1,2],[x,y]);
(%o6) [[expintegral_e(1, x), expintegral_e(1, y)], 
       [expintegral_e(2, x), expintegral_e(2, y)]]
@end example

Check if a function has the property distribute_over:

@c ===beg===
@c properties(abs);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i7) properties(abs);
(%o7) [integral, distributes over bags, noun, rule, gradef]
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{domain}
@defvr {Option variable} domain
Default value: @code{real}

When @code{domain} is set to @code{complex}, @code{sqrt (x^2)} will remain
@code{sqrt (x^2)} instead of returning @code{abs(x)}.

@c PRESERVE EDITORIAL COMMENT -- MAY HAVE SOME SIGNIFICANCE NOT YET UNDERSTOOD !!!
@c The notion of a "domain" of simplification is still in its infancy,
@c and controls little more than this at the moment.

@opencatbox
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{evenfun}
@anchor{oddfun}
@defvr  {Property} evenfun
@defvrx {Property} oddfun

@code{declare(f, evenfun} or @code{declare(f, oddfun} tells Maxima to recognize
the function @code{f} as an even or odd function.

Examples:

@example
(%i1) o (- x) + o (x);
(%o1)                     o(x) + o(- x)
(%i2) declare (o, oddfun);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) o (- x) + o (x);
(%o3)                           0
(%i4) e (- x) - e (x);
(%o4)                     e(- x) - e(x)
(%i5) declare (e, evenfun);
(%o5)                         done
(%i6) e (- x) - e (x);
(%o6)                           0
@end example
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{expand}
@deffn  {Function} expand (@var{expr})
@deffnx {Function} expand (@var{expr}, @var{p}, @var{n})

Expand expression @var{expr}.
Products of sums and exponentiated sums are
multiplied out, numerators of rational expressions which are sums are
split into their respective terms, and multiplication (commutative
and non-commutative) are distributed over addition at all levels of
@var{expr}.

For polynomials one should usually use @code{ratexpand} which uses a
more efficient algorithm.

@code{maxnegex} and @code{maxposex} control the maximum negative and
positive exponents, respectively, which will expand.

@code{expand (@var{expr}, @var{p}, @var{n})} expands @var{expr}, 
using @var{p} for @code{maxposex} and @var{n} for @code{maxnegex}.
This is useful in order to expand part but not all of an expression.

@code{expon} - the exponent of the largest negative power which is
automatically expanded (independent of calls to @code{expand}).  For example
if @code{expon} is 4 then @code{(x+1)^(-5)} will not be automatically expanded.

@code{expop} - the highest positive exponent which is automatically expanded.
Thus @code{(x+1)^3}, when typed, will be automatically expanded only if
@code{expop} is greater than or equal to 3.  If it is desired to have
@code{(x+1)^n} expanded where @code{n} is greater than @code{expop} then
executing @code{expand ((x+1)^n)} will work only if @code{maxposex} is not
less than @code{n}.

@code{expand(expr, 0, 0)} causes a resimplification of @code{expr}.  @code{expr}
is not reevaluated.  In distinction from @code{ev(expr, noeval)} a special
representation (e. g. a CRE form) is removed.  See also @code{ev}.

The @code{expand} flag used with @code{ev} causes expansion.

The file @file{share/simplification/facexp.mac}
@c I should really use a macro which expands to something like
@c @uref{file://...,,simplification/facexp.mac}.  But texi2html
@c currently supports @uref only with one argument.
@c Worse, the `file:' scheme is OS and browser dependent.
contains several related functions (in particular @code{facsum},
@code{factorfacsum} and @code{collectterms}, which are autoloaded) and variables
(@code{nextlayerfactor} and @code{facsum_combine}) that provide the user with
the ability to structure expressions by controlled expansion.
@c MERGE share/simplification/facexp.usg INTO THIS FILE OR CREATE NEW FILE facexp.texi
Brief function descriptions are available in @file{simplification/facexp.usg}.
A demo is available by doing @code{demo("facexp")}.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c expr:(x+1)^2*(y+1)^3;
@c expand(expr);
@c expand(expr,2);
@c expr:(x+1)^-2*(y+1)^3;
@c expand(expr);
@c expand(expr,2,2);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) expr:(x+1)^2*(y+1)^3;
                               2        3
(%o1)                   (x + 1)  (y + 1)
(%i2) expand(expr);
       2  3        3    3      2  2        2      2      2
(%o2) x  y  + 2 x y  + y  + 3 x  y  + 6 x y  + 3 y  + 3 x  y
                                                      2
                                     + 6 x y + 3 y + x  + 2 x + 1
(%i3) expand(expr,2);
               2        3              3          3
(%o3)         x  (y + 1)  + 2 x (y + 1)  + (y + 1)
(%i4) expr:(x+1)^-2*(y+1)^3;
                                   3
                            (y + 1)
(%o4)                       --------
                                   2
                            (x + 1)
(%i5) expand(expr);
            3               2
           y             3 y            3 y             1
(%o5) ------------ + ------------ + ------------ + ------------
       2              2              2              2
      x  + 2 x + 1   x  + 2 x + 1   x  + 2 x + 1   x  + 2 x + 1
(%i6) expand(expr,2,2);
@group
                                   3
                            (y + 1)
(%o6)                     ------------
                           2
                          x  + 2 x + 1
@end group
@end example

Resimplify an expression without expansion:

@c ===beg===
@c expr:(1+x)^2*sin(x);
@c exponentialize:true;
@c expand(expr,0,0);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i7) expr:(1+x)^2*sin(x);
                                       2
(%o7)                           (x + 1)  sin(x)
(%i8) exponentialize:true;
(%o8)                                true
(%i9) expand(expr,0,0);
                                   2    %i x     - %i x
                         %i (x + 1)  (%e     - %e      )
(%o9)                  - -------------------------------
                                        2
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{expandwrt}
@deffn {Function} expandwrt (@var{expr}, @var{x_1}, @dots{}, @var{x_n})

Expands expression @code{expr} with respect to the 
variables @var{x_1}, @dots{}, @var{x_n}.
All products involving the variables appear explicitly.  The form returned
will be free of products of sums of expressions that are not free of
the variables.  @var{x_1}, @dots{}, @var{x_n}
may be variables, operators, or expressions.

By default, denominators are not expanded, but this can be controlled by
means of the switch @code{expandwrt_denom}.

This function is autoloaded from
@file{simplification/stopex.mac}.

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{expandwert_denom}
@defvr {Option variable} expandwrt_denom
Default value: @code{false}

@code{expandwrt_denom} controls the treatment of rational
expressions by @code{expandwrt}.  If @code{true}, then both the numerator and
denominator of the expression will be expanded according to the
arguments of @code{expandwrt}, but if @code{expandwrt_denom} is @code{false},
then only the numerator will be expanded in that way.

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS A STAND-ALONE DESCRIPTION (NOT "IS SIMILAR TO")
@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{expandwrt_factored}
@deffn {Function} expandwrt_factored (@var{expr}, @var{x_1}, @dots{}, @var{x_n})

is similar to @code{expandwrt}, but treats expressions that are products
somewhat differently.  @code{expandwrt_factored} expands only on those factors
of @code{expr} that contain the variables @var{x_1}, @dots{}, @var{x_n}.

@c NOT SURE WHY WE SHOULD MENTION THIS HERE
This function is autoloaded from @file{simplification/stopex.mac}.

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{expon}
@defvr {Option variable} expon
Default value: 0

@code{expon} is the exponent of the largest negative power which
is automatically expanded (independent of calls to @code{expand}).  For
example, if @code{expon} is 4 then @code{(x+1)^(-5)} will not be automatically
expanded.

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{exponentialize}
@deffn  {Function} exponentialize (@var{expr})
@deffnx {Option variable} exponentialize

The function @code{exponentialize (expr)} converts 
circular and hyperbolic functions in @var{expr} to exponentials,
without setting the global variable @code{exponentialize}.

When the variable @code{exponentialize} is @code{true},
all circular and hyperbolic functions are converted to exponential form.
The default value is @code{false}.

@code{demoivre} converts complex exponentials into circular functions.
@code{exponentialize} and @code{demoivre} cannot
both be true at the same time.

@opencatbox
@category{Complex variables} @category{Trigonometric functions} @category{Hyperbolic functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION
@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{expop}
@defvr {Option variable} expop
Default value: 0

@code{expop} is the highest positive exponent which is automatically expanded.
Thus @code{(x + 1)^3}, when typed, will be automatically expanded only if
@code{expop} is greater than or equal to 3.  If it is desired to have
@code{(x + 1)^n} expanded where @code{n} is greater than @code{expop} then
executing @code{expand ((x + 1)^n)} will work only if @code{maxposex} is not
less than n.

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{lassociative}
@defvr {Property} lassociative

@code{declare (g, lassociative)} tells the Maxima simplifier that @code{g} is
left-associative.  E.g., @code{g (g (a, b), g (c, d))} will simplify to
@code{g (g (g (a, b), c), d)}.

@opencatbox
@category{Declarations and inferences} @category{Operators} @category{Simplification}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES
@c WHAT'S UP WITH THE QUOTE MARKS ??

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{linear}
@defvr {Property} linear

One of Maxima's operator properties.  For univariate @code{f} so
declared, "expansion" @code{f(x + y)} yields @code{f(x) + f(y)},
@code{f(a*x)} yields @code{a*f(x)} takes
place where @code{a} is a "constant".  For functions of two or more arguments,
"linearity" is defined to be as in the case of @code{sum} or @code{integrate},
i.e., @code{f (a*x + b, x)} yields @code{a*f(x,x) + b*f(1,x)}
for @code{a} and @code{b} free of @code{x}.

@code{linear} is equivalent to @code{additive} and @code{outative}.
See also @code{opproperties}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c 'sum (F(k) + G(k), k, 1, inf);
@c declare (nounify (sum), linear);
@c 'sum (F(k) + G(k), k, 1, inf);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) 'sum (F(k) + G(k), k, 1, inf);
                       inf
                       ====
                       \
(%o1)                   >    (G(k) + F(k))
                       /
                       ====
                       k = 1
(%i2) declare (nounify (sum), linear);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) 'sum (F(k) + G(k), k, 1, inf);
@group
                     inf          inf
                     ====         ====
                     \            \
(%o3)                 >    G(k) +  >    F(k)
                     /            /
                     ====         ====
                     k = 1        k = 1
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Declarations and inferences} @category{Operators} @category{Simplification}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{maxnegex}
@defvr {Option variable} maxnegex
Default value: 1000

@code{maxnegex} is the largest negative exponent which will
be expanded by the @code{expand} command (see also @code{maxposex}).

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{maxposex}
@defvr {Option variable} maxposex
Default value: 1000

@code{maxposex} is the largest exponent which will be
expanded with the @code{expand} command (see also @code{maxnegex}).

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{multiplicative}
@defvr {Property} multiplicative

@code{declare(f, multiplicative)} tells the Maxima simplifier that @code{f}
is multiplicative.

@enumerate
@item
If @code{f} is univariate, whenever the simplifier encounters @code{f} applied
to a product, @code{f} distributes over that product.  E.g., @code{f(x*y)}
simplifies to @code{f(x)*f(y)}.
@item
If @code{f} is a function of 2 or more arguments, multiplicativity is
defined as multiplicativity in the first argument to @code{f}, e.g.,
@code{f (g(x) * h(x), x)} simplifies to @code{f (g(x) ,x) * f (h(x), x)}.
@end enumerate

This simplification does not occur when @code{f} is applied to expressions of
the form @code{product (x[i], i, m, n)}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c F2 (a * b * c);
@c declare (F2, multiplicative);
@c F2 (a * b * c);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) F2 (a * b * c);
(%o1)                       F2(a b c)
(%i2) declare (F2, multiplicative);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) F2 (a * b * c);
(%o3)                   F2(a) F2(b) F2(c)
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Declarations and inferences} @category{Expressions} @category{Simplification}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS WORK

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{multthru}
@deffn  {Function} multthru (@var{expr})
@deffnx {Function} multthru (@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2})

Multiplies a factor (which should be a sum) of @var{expr} by the other factors
of @var{expr}.  That is, @var{expr} is @code{@var{f_1} @var{f_2} ... @var{f_n}}
where at least one factor, say @var{f_i}, is a sum of terms.  Each term in that
sum is multiplied by the other factors in the product.  (Namely all the factors
except @var{f_i}).  @code{multthru} does not expand exponentiated sums.
This function is the fastest way to distribute products (commutative or
noncommutative) over sums.  Since quotients are represented as products
@code{multthru} can be used to divide sums by products as well.

@code{multthru (@var{expr_1}, @var{expr_2})} multiplies each term in
@var{expr_2} (which should be a sum or an equation) by @var{expr_1}.  If
@var{expr_1} is not itself a sum then this form is equivalent to
@code{multthru (@var{expr_1}*@var{expr_2})}.

@example
(%i1) x/(x-y)^2 - 1/(x-y) - f(x)/(x-y)^3;
                      1        x         f(x)
(%o1)             - ----- + -------- - --------
                    x - y          2          3
                            (x - y)    (x - y)
(%i2) multthru ((x-y)^3, %);
                           2
(%o2)             - (x - y)  + x (x - y) - f(x)
(%i3) ratexpand (%);
                           2
(%o3)                   - y  + x y - f(x)
(%i4) ((a+b)^10*s^2 + 2*a*b*s + (a*b)^2)/(a*b*s^2);
                        10  2              2  2
                 (b + a)   s  + 2 a b s + a  b
(%o4)            ------------------------------
                                  2
                             a b s
(%i5) multthru (%);  /* note that this does not expand (b+a)^10 */
                                        10
                       2   a b   (b + a)
(%o5)                  - + --- + ---------
                       s    2       a b
                           s
(%i6) multthru (a.(b+c.(d+e)+f));
(%o6)            a . f + a . c . (e + d) + a . b
(%i7) expand (a.(b+c.(d+e)+f));
(%o7)         a . f + a . c . e + a . c . d + a . b
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{property_nary}
@defvr {Property} nary

@code{declare(f, nary)} tells Maxima to recognize the function @code{f} as an
n-ary function.

The @code{nary} declaration is not the same as calling the
@mxref{function_nary, nary} function.  The sole effect of
@code{declare(f, nary)} is to instruct the Maxima simplifier to flatten nested
expressions, for example, to simplify @code{foo(x, foo(y, z))} to
@code{foo(x, y, z)}.  See also @mrefdot{declare}

Example:

@example
(%i1) H (H (a, b), H (c, H (d, e)));
(%o1)               H(H(a, b), H(c, H(d, e)))
(%i2) declare (H, nary);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) H (H (a, b), H (c, H (d, e)));
(%o3)                   H(a, b, c, d, e)
@end example
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{negdistrib}
@defvr {Option variable} negdistrib
Default value: @code{true}

When @code{negdistrib} is @code{true}, -1 distributes over an expression.
E.g., @code{-(x + y)} becomes @code{- y - x}.  Setting it to @code{false}
will allow @code{- (x + y)} to be displayed like that.  This is sometimes useful
but be very careful: like the @code{simp} flag, this is one flag you do not
want to set to @code{false} as a matter of course or necessarily for other
than local use in your Maxima.

@opencatbox
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{opproperties}
@defvr {System variable} opproperties

@code{opproperties} is the list of the special operator properties recognized
by the Maxima simplifier:
@code{linear}, @code{additive}, @code{multiplicative}, @code{outative},
@code{evenfun}, @code{oddfun}, @code{commutative}, @code{symmetric},
@code{antisymmetric}, @code{nary}, @code{lassociative}, @code{rassociative}.

@opencatbox
@category{Global variables} @category{Operators}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{outative}
@defvr {Property} outative

@code{declare(f, outative)} tells the Maxima simplifier that constant factors
in the argument of @code{f} can be pulled out.

@enumerate
@item
If @code{f} is univariate, whenever the simplifier encounters @code{f} applied
to a product, that product will be partitioned into factors that are constant
and factors that are not and the constant factors will be pulled out.  E.g.,
@code{f(a*x)} will simplify to @code{a*f(x)} where @code{a} is a constant.
Non-atomic constant factors will not be pulled out.
@item
If @code{f} is a function of 2 or more arguments, outativity is defined as in
the case of @code{sum} or @code{integrate}, i.e., @code{f (a*g(x), x)} will
simplify to @code{a * f(g(x), x)} for @code{a} free of @code{x}.
@end enumerate

@code{sum}, @code{integrate}, and @code{limit} are all @code{outative}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c F1 (100 * x);
@c declare (F1, outative);
@c F1 (100 * x);
@c declare (zz, constant);
@c F1 (zz * y);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) F1 (100 * x);
(%o1)                       F1(100 x)
(%i2) declare (F1, outative);
(%o2)                         done
(%i3) F1 (100 * x);
(%o3)                       100 F1(x)
(%i4) declare (zz, constant);
(%o4)                         done
(%i5) F1 (zz * y);
(%o5)                       zz F1(y)
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Declarations and inferences} @category{Operators}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{radcan}
@deffn {Function} radcan (@var{expr})

Simplifies @var{expr}, which can contain logs, exponentials, and radicals, by 
converting it into a form which is canonical over a large class of expressions 
and a given ordering of variables; that is, all functionally equivalent forms 
are mapped into a unique form.  For a somewhat larger class of expressions, 
@code{radcan} produces a regular form.  Two equivalent expressions in this class 
do not necessarily have the same appearance, but their difference can be 
simplified by @code{radcan} to zero.

For some expressions @code{radcan} is quite time consuming.  This is the cost 
of exploring certain relationships among the components of the expression for 
simplifications based on factoring and partial-fraction expansions of exponents.

@c %e_to_numlog NEEDS ITS OWN @defvar !!!

@c %e_to_numlog HAS NO EFFECT ON RADCAN. RADCAN ALWAYS SIMPLIFIES 
@c exp(a*log(x)) --> x^a. Commenting the following out. 11/2009
@c When @code{%e_to_numlog} is @code{true}, @code{%e^(r*log(expr))} simplifies 
@c to @code{expr^r} if @code{r} is a rational number.

@c RADEXPAND CONTROLS THE SIMPLIFICATION OF THE POWER FUNCTION, E.G.
@c (x*y)^a --> x^a*y^a AND (x^a)^b --> x^(a*b), IF RADEXPAND HAS THE VALUE 'ALL.
@c THE VALUE OF RADEXPAND HAS NO EFFECT ON RADCAN. RADCAN ALWAYS SIMPLIFIES
@c THE ABOVE EXPRESSIONS. COMMENTING THE FOLLOWING OUT. 11/2009
@c When @code{radexpand} is @code{false}, certain transformations are inhibited.
@c @code{radcan (sqrt (1-x))} remains @code{sqrt (1-x)} and is not simplified 
@c to @code{%i sqrt (x-1)}. @code{radcan (sqrt (x^2 - 2*x + 1))} remains 
@c @code{sqrt (x^2 - 2*x + 1)} and is not simplified to @code{x - 1}.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c radcan((log(x+x^2)-log(x))^a/log(1+x)^(a/2));
@c radcan((log(1+2*a^x+a^(2*x))/log(1+a^x)));
@c radcan((%e^x-1)/(1+%e^(x/2)));
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) radcan((log(x+x^2)-log(x))^a/log(1+x)^(a/2));
                                           a/2
(%o1)                            log(x + 1)

(%i2) radcan((log(1+2*a^x+a^(2*x))/log(1+a^x)));
(%o2)                                  2

(%i3) radcan((%e^x-1)/(1+%e^(x/2)));
                                     x/2
(%o3)                              %e    - 1
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Simplification functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{radexpand}
@defvr {Option variable} radexpand
Default value: @code{true}

@code{radexpand} controls some simplifications of radicals.

When @code{radexpand} is @code{all}, causes nth roots of factors of a product
which are powers of n to be pulled outside of the radical.  E.g. if
@code{radexpand} is @code{all}, @code{sqrt (16*x^2)} simplifies to @code{4*x}.

@c EXPRESS SIMPLIFICATON RULES IN GENERAL CASE, NOT SPECIAL CASE
More particularly, consider @code{sqrt (x^2)}.
@itemize @bullet
@item
If @code{radexpand} is @code{all} or @code{assume (x > 0)} has been executed, 
@code{sqrt(x^2)} simplifies to @code{x}.
@item
If @code{radexpand} is @code{true} and @code{domain} is @code{real}
(its default), @code{sqrt(x^2)} simplifies to @code{abs(x)}.
@item
If @code{radexpand} is @code{false}, or @code{radexpand} is @code{true} and
@code{domain} is @code{complex}, @code{sqrt(x^2)} is not simplified.
@end itemize

@c CORRECT STATEMENT HERE ???
Note that @code{domain} only matters when @code{radexpand} is @code{true}.

@opencatbox
@category{Simplification flags and variables}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{rassociative}
@defvr {Property} rassociative

@code{declare (g, rassociative)} tells the Maxima
simplifier that @code{g} is right-associative.  E.g.,
@code{g(g(a, b), g(c, d))} simplifies to @code{g(a, g(b, g(c, d)))}.

@opencatbox
@category{Declarations and inferences} @category{Operators}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{scsimp}
@deffn {Function} scsimp (@var{expr}, @var{rule_1}, @dots{}, @var{rule_n})

Sequential Comparative Simplification (method due to Stoute).
@code{scsimp} attempts to simplify @var{expr}
according to the rules @var{rule_1}, @dots{}, @var{rule_n}.
If a smaller expression is obtained, the process repeats.  Otherwise after all
simplifications are tried, it returns the original answer.

@c MERGE EXAMPLES INTO THIS FILE
@code{example (scsimp)} displays some examples.

@opencatbox
@category{Simplification functions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{simp}
@defvr {Option variable} simp
Default value: @code{true}

@code{simp} enables simplification.  This is the standard.  @code{simp} is also
an @code{evflag}, which is recognized by the function @code{ev}.  See @code{ev}.

When @code{simp} is used as an @code{evflag} with a value @code{false}, the 
simplification is suppressed only during the evaluation phase of an expression.
The flag can not suppress the simplification which follows the evaluation 
phase.

Examples:

The simplification is switched off globally.  The expression @code{sin(1.0)} is
not simplified to its numerical value.  The @code{simp}-flag switches the
simplification on.

@c ===beg===
@c simp:false;
@c sin(1.0);
@c sin(1.0),simp;
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) simp:false;
(%o1)                                false
(%i2) sin(1.0);
(%o2)                              sin(1.0)
(%i3) sin(1.0),simp;
(%o3)                          .8414709848078965
@end example

The simplification is switched on again.  The @code{simp}-flag cannot suppress
the simplification completely.  The output shows a simplified expression, but
the variable @code{x} has an unsimplified expression as a value, because the
assignment has occurred during the evaluation phase of the expression.

@c ===beg===
@c simp:true;
@c x:sin(1.0),simp:false;
@c :lisp $x
@c ===end===
@example
(%i4) simp:true;
(%o4)                                true
(%i5) x:sin(1.0),simp:false;
(%o5)                          .8414709848078965
(%i6) :lisp $X
((%SIN) 1.0)
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Evaluation flags}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c NEEDS CLARIFICATION, EXAMPLES

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{symmetric}
@defvr {Property} symmetric

@code{declare (h, symmetric)} tells the Maxima
simplifier that @code{h} is a symmetric function.  E.g., @code{h (x, z, y)} 
simplifies to @code{h (x, y, z)}.

@code{commutative} is synonymous with @code{symmetric}.

@opencatbox
@category{Declarations and inferences} @category{Operators}
@closecatbox
@end defvr

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{xthru}
@deffn {Function} xthru (@var{expr})

Combines all terms of @var{expr} (which should be a sum) over a common
denominator without expanding products and exponentiated sums as @code{ratsimp}
does.  @code{xthru} cancels common factors in the numerator and denominator of
rational expressions but only if the factors are explicit.

@c REPHRASE IN NEUTRAL TONE (GET RID OF "IT IS BETTER")
Sometimes it is better to use @code{xthru} before @code{ratsimp}ing an
expression in order to cause explicit factors of the gcd of the numerator and
denominator to be canceled thus simplifying the expression to be
@code{ratsimp}ed.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c ((x+2)^20 - 2*y)/(x+y)^20 + (x+y)^(-19) - x/(x+y)^20;
@c xthru (%);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) ((x+2)^20 - 2*y)/(x+y)^20 + (x+y)^(-19) - x/(x+y)^20;
@group
                                20
                 1       (x + 2)   - 2 y       x
(%o1)        --------- + --------------- - ---------
                    19             20             20
             (y + x)        (y + x)        (y + x)
@end group
(%i2) xthru (%);
                                 20
                          (x + 2)   - y
(%o2)                     -------------
                                   20
                            (y + x)
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Expressions}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

