@menu
* Introduction to solve_rec::
* Functions and Variables for solve_rec::
@end menu

@node Introduction to solve_rec, Functions and Variables for solve_rec, solve_rec, solve_rec
@section Introduction to solve_rec

@code{solve_rec} is a package for solving linear recurrences with polynomial
coefficients.

A demo is available with @code{demo(solve_rec);}.

Example:

@example
(%i1) load("solve_rec")$
@group
(%i2) solve_rec((n+4)*s[n+2] + s[n+1] - (n+1)*s[n], s[n]);
                                    n
                 %k  (2 n + 3) (- 1)          %k
                   1                            2
(%o2)       s  = -------------------- + ---------------
             n     (n + 1) (n + 2)      (n + 1) (n + 2)
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Linear recurrences} @category{Share packages} @category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@node Functions and Variables for solve_rec,  , Introduction to solve_rec, solve_rec
@section Functions and Variables for solve_rec

@deffn {Function} reduce_order (@var{rec}, @var{sol}, @var{var})

Reduces the order of linear recurrence @var{rec} when a particular solution
@var{sol} is known. The reduced reccurence can be used to get other solutions.

Example:

@example
@group
(%i3) rec: x[n+2] = x[n+1] + x[n]/n;
                                      x
                                       n
(%o3)               x      = x      + --
                     n + 2    n + 1   n
@end group
@group
(%i4) solve_rec(rec, x[n]);
WARNING: found some hypergeometrical solutions! 
(%o4)                    x  = %k  n
                          n     1
@end group
@group
(%i5) reduce_order(rec, n, x[n]);
(%t5)                    x  = n %z
                          n       n

                           n - 1
                           ====
                           \
(%t6)                %z  =  >     %u
                       n   /        %j
                           ====
                           %j = 0

(%o6)             (- n - 2) %u     - %u
                              n + 1     n
@end group
@group
(%i6) solve_rec((n+2)*%u[n+1] + %u[n], %u[n]);
                                     n
                            %k  (- 1)
                              1
(%o6)                 %u  = ----------
                        n    (n + 1)!

So the general solution is

             n - 1
             ====        j
             \      (- 1)
       %k  n  >    -------- + %k  n
         2   /     (j + 1)!     1
             ====
             j = 0
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@defvr {Option variable} simplify_products
Default value: @code{true}

If @code{simplify_products} is @code{true}, @code{solve_rec} will try to
simplify products in result.

See also: @code{solve_rec}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@end defvr

@deffn {Function} simplify_sum (@var{expr})

Tries to simplify all sums appearing in @var{expr} to a closed form.

To use this function first load the @code{simplify_sum} package with
@code{load(simplify_sum)}.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c load("simplify_sum")$
@c sum(binomial(n+k,k)/2^k, k, 1, n) + sum(binomial(2*n, 2*k), k, 1,n);
@c simplify_sum(%);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) load("simplify_sum")$
@group
(%i2) sum(binomial(n+k,k)/2^k,k,1,n)+sum(binomial(2*n,2*k),k,1,n);
        n                          n
       ====                       ====
       \     binomial(n + k, k)   \
(%o2)   >    ------------------ +  >    binomial(2 n, 2 k)
       /              k           /
       ====          2            ====
       k = 1                      k = 1
@end group
@group
(%i3) simplify_sum(%);

                         2 n - 1    n
(%o3)                   2        + 2  - 2
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec} @category{Sums and products} @category{Simplification functions}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} solve_rec (@var{eqn}, @var{var}, [@var{init}])
Solves for hypergeometrical solutions to linear recurrence @var{eqn} with
polynomials coefficient in variable @var{var}. Optional arguments @var{init}
are initial conditions.

@code{solve_rec} can solve linear recurrences with constant coefficients,
finds hypergeometrical solutions to homogeneous linear recurrences with
polynomial coefficients, rational solutions to linear recurrences with
polynomial coefficients and can solve Ricatti type recurrences.

Note that the running time of the algorithm used to find hypergeometrical
solutions is exponential in the degree of the leading and trailing
coefficient.

To use this function first load the @code{solve_rec} package with
@code{load(solve_rec);}.

Example of linear recurrence with constant coefficients:

@example
@group
(%i2) solve_rec(a[n]=a[n-1]+a[n-2]+n/2^n, a[n]);
                        n          n
           (sqrt(5) - 1)  %k  (- 1)
                            1           n
(%o2) a  = ------------------------- - ----
       n               n                  n
                      2                5 2
                                                n
                                   (sqrt(5) + 1)  %k
                                                    2    2
                                 + ------------------ - ----
                                            n              n
                                           2            5 2
@end group
@end example

Example of linear recurrence with polynomial coefficients:

@example
@group
(%i7) 2*x*(x+1)*y[x] - (x^2+3*x-2)*y[x+1] + (x-1)*y[x+2];
                         2
(%o7) (x - 1) y      - (x  + 3 x - 2) y      + 2 x (x + 1) y
               x + 2                   x + 1                x
@end group
@group
(%i8) solve_rec(%, y[x], y[1]=1, y[3]=3);
                              x
                           3 2    x!
(%o9)                 y  = ---- - --
                       x    4     2
@end group
@end example

Example of Ricatti type recurrence:

@example
@group
(%i2) x*y[x+1]*y[x] - y[x+1]/(x+2) + y[x]/(x-1) = 0;
                            y         y
                             x + 1     x
(%o2)         x y  y      - ------ + ----- = 0
                 x  x + 1   x + 2    x - 1
@end group
(%i3) solve_rec(%, y[x], y[3]=5)$
@group
(%i4) ratsimp(minfactorial(factcomb(%)));
                                   3
                               30 x  - 30 x
(%o4) y  = - -------------------------------------------------
       x        6      5       4       3       2
             5 x  - 3 x  - 25 x  + 15 x  + 20 x  - 12 x - 1584
@end group
@end example


See also: @code{solve_rec_rat}, @code{simplify_products}, and @code{product_use_gamma}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} solve_rec_rat (@var{eqn}, @var{var}, [@var{init}])

Solves for rational solutions to linear recurrences. See solve_rec for
description of arguments.

To use this function first load the @code{solve_rec} package with
@code{load(solve_rec);}.

Example:

@example
@group
(%i1) (x+4)*a[x+3] + (x+3)*a[x+2] - x*a[x+1] + (x^2-1)*a[x];
(%o1)  (x + 4) a      + (x + 3) a      - x a
                x + 3            x + 2      x + 1
                                                   2
                                               + (x  - 1) a
                                                            x
@end group
@group
(%i2) solve_rec_rat(% = (x+2)/(x+1), a[x]);
                       1
(%o2)      a  = ---------------
            x   (x - 1) (x + 1)
@end group
@end example


See also: @code{solve_rec}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@defvr {Option variable} product_use_gamma
Default value: @code{true}

When simplifying products, @code{solve_rec} introduces gamma function
into the expression if @code{product_use_gamma} is @code{true}.

See also: @code{simplify_products}, @code{solve_rec}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@end defvr

@deffn {Function} summand_to_rec (@var{summand}, @var{k}, @var{n})
@deffnx {Function} summand_to_rec (@var{summand}, [@var{k}, @var{lo}, @var{hi}], @var{n})

Returns the recurrence sattisfied by the sum

@example
@group
     hi
    ====
    \
     >     summand
    /
    ====
  k = lo
@end group
@end example

where summand is hypergeometrical in @var{k} and @var{n}. If @var{lo} and @var{hi}
are omited, they are assumed to be @code{lo = -inf} and @code{hi = inf}.

To use this function first load the @code{simplify_sum} package with
@code{load(simplify_sum)}.

Example:

@example
(%i1) load("simplify_sum")$
@group
(%i2) summand: binom(n,k);
(%o2)                           binomial(n, k)
@end group
@group
(%i3) summand_to_rec(summand,k,n);
(%o3)                      2 sm  - sm      = 0
                               n     n + 1
@end group
@group
(%i7) summand: binom(n, k)/(k+1);
                                binomial(n, k)
(%o7)                           --------------
                                    k + 1
@end group
@group
(%i8) summand_to_rec(summand, [k, 0, n], n);
(%o8)               2 (n + 1) sm  - (n + 2) sm      = - 1
                                n             n + 1
@end group
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package solve_rec}
@closecatbox

@end deffn
