@menu
* Introduction to string processing::
* Functions and Variables for input and output::
* Functions and Variables for characters::
* Functions and Variables for strings::
@end menu

@node Introduction to string processing, Functions and Variables for input and output, stringproc, stringproc
@section Introduction to string processing

@code{stringproc.lisp} enlarges Maximas capabilities of working with strings 
and adds some useful functions for file in/output.

For questions and bugs please mail to van.nek at arcor.de .

In Maxima a string is easily constructed by typing "text".
@code{stringp} tests for strings.

@c ===beg===
@c m: "text";
@c stringp(m);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) m: "text";
(%o1)                         text
(%i2) stringp(m);
(%o2)                         true
@end example

Characters are represented as strings of length 1.
These are not Lisp characters.
Tests can be done with @code{charp} (respectively @code{lcharp}
and conversion from Lisp to Maxima characters with @code{cunlisp}).


@c ===beg===
@c c: "e";
@c [charp(c),lcharp(c)];
@c supcase(c);
@c charp(%);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) c: "e";
(%o1)                           e
(%i2) [charp(c),lcharp(c)];
(%o2)                     [true, false]
(%i3) supcase(c);
(%o3)                           E
(%i4) charp(%);
(%o4)                         true
@end example

All functions in @code{stringproc.lisp} that return characters, return Maxima-characters.
Due to the fact, that the introduced characters are strings of length 1,
you can use a lot of string functions also for characters.
As seen, @code{supcase} is one example.

It is important to know,
that the first character in a Maxima-string is at position 1.
This is designed due to the fact that the first element in a Maxima-list is at position 1 too.
See definitions of @code{charat} and @code{charlist} for examples.

In applications string-functions are often used when working with files.
You will find some useful stream- and print-functions in @code{stringproc.lisp}.
The following example shows some of the here introduced functions at work.

Example: 

@code{openw} returns an output stream to a file, @code{printf} then allows formatted writing 
to this file. See @code{printf} for details.

@example
(%i1) s: openw("E:/file.txt");
(%o1)                    #<output stream E:/file.txt>
(%i2) for n:0 thru 10 do printf( s, "~d ", fib(n) );
(%o2)                                done
(%i3) printf( s, "~%~d ~f ~a ~a ~f ~e ~a~%", 
              42,1.234,sqrt(2),%pi,1.0e-2,1.0e-2,1.0b-2 );
(%o3)                                false
(%i4) close(s);
(%o4)                                true
@end example

After closing the stream you can open it again, this time with input direction. 
@code{readline} returns the entire line as one string. The @code{stringproc} package 
now offers a lot of functions for manipulating strings. Tokenizing can be done by 
@code{split} or @code{tokens}.

@example
(%i5) s: openr("E:/file.txt");
(%o5)                     #<input stream E:/file.txt>
(%i6) readline(s);
(%o6)                     0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 
(%i7) line: readline(s);
(%o7)               42 1.234 sqrt(2) %pi 0.01 1.0E-2 1.0b-2
(%i8) list: tokens(line);
(%o8)           [42, 1.234, sqrt(2), %pi, 0.01, 1.0E-2, 1.0b-2]
(%i9) map( parse_string, list );
(%o9)            [42, 1.234, sqrt(2), %pi, 0.01, 0.01, 1.0b-2]
(%i10) float(%);
(%o10) [42.0, 1.234, 1.414213562373095, 3.141592653589793, 0.01,
                                                     0.01, 0.01]
(%i11) readline(s);
(%o11)                               false
(%i12) close(s)$
@end example

@code{readline} returns @code{false} when the end of file occurs.

@opencatbox
@category{Strings} @category{Share packages} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox


@node Functions and Variables for input and output, Functions and Variables for characters, Introduction to string processing, stringproc
@section Functions and Variables for input and output

Example: 

@c ===beg===
@c s: openw("E:/file.txt");
@c control: 
@c  "~2tAn atom: ~20t~a~%~2tand a list: ~20t~@{~r ~@}~%~2tand an integer: ~20t~d~%"$
@c printf( s,control, 'true,[1,2,3],42 )$
@c close(s);
@c s: openr("E:/file.txt");
@c while stringp( tmp:readline(s) ) do print(tmp)$
@c close(s)$
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) s: openw("E:/file.txt");
(%o1)                     #<output stream E:/file.txt>
(%i2) control: 
"~2tAn atom: ~20t~a~%~2tand a list: ~20t~@{~r ~@}~%~2t\
and an integer: ~20t~d~%"$
(%i3) printf( s,control, 'true,[1,2,3],42 )$
(%o3)                                false
(%i4) close(s);
(%o4)                                true
(%i5) s: openr("E:/file.txt");
(%o5)                     #<input stream E:/file.txt>
(%i6) while stringp( tmp:readline(s) ) do print(tmp)$
  An atom:          true 
  and a list:       one two three  
  and an integer:   42 
(%i7) close(s)$
@end example

@deffn {Function} close (@var{stream}) 
Closes @var{stream} and returns @code{true} if @var{stream} had been open. 

@opencatbox
@category{File input} @category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} flength (@var{stream})
Returns the number of elements in @var{stream}. 

@opencatbox
@category{File input} @category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} fposition (@var{stream})
@deffnx {Function} fposition (@var{stream}, @var{pos})
Returns the current position in @var{stream}, if @var{pos} is not used.
If @var{pos} is used,
@code{fposition} sets the position in @var{stream}.
@var{pos} has to be a positive number,
the first element in @var{stream} is in position 1.

@opencatbox
@category{File input} @category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} freshline () 
@deffnx {Function} freshline (@var{stream}) 
Writes a new line (to @var{stream}),
if the position is not at the beginning of a line.
See also @code{newline}.

@opencatbox
@category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} newline () 
@deffnx {Function} newline (@var{stream}) 
Writes a new line (to @var{stream}).
See @code{sprint} for an example of using @code{newline()}.
Note that there are some cases, where @code{newline()} does not work as expected. 

@opencatbox
@category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} opena (@var{file}) 
Returns an output stream to @var{file}.
If an existing file is opened, @code{opena} appends elements at the end of file.

@opencatbox
@category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} openr (@var{file}) 
Returns an input stream to @var{file}.
If @var{file} does not exist, it will be created.

@opencatbox
@category{File input} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} openw (@var{file}) 
Returns an output stream to @var{file}.
If @var{file} does not exist, it will be created.
If an existing file is opened, @code{openw} destructively modifies @var{file}.

@opencatbox
@category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} printf (@var{dest}, @var{string})
@deffnx {Function} printf (@var{dest}, @var{string}, @var{expr_1}, ..., @var{expr_n})
Makes the Common Lisp function FORMAT available in Maxima. 
(From gcl.info: "format produces formatted output by outputting the characters of 
control-string string and observing that a tilde introduces a directive.
The character after the tilde,
possibly preceded by prefix parameters and modifiers,
specifies what kind of formatting is desired.
Most directives use one or more elements of args to create their output.")

The following description and the examples may give an idea of using @code{printf}.
See a Lisp reference for more information.

@example
   ~%       new line
   ~&       fresh line
   ~t       tab
   ~$       monetary
   ~d       decimal integer
   ~b       binary integer
   ~o       octal integer
   ~x       hexadecimal integer
   ~br      base-b integer
   ~r       spell an integer
   ~p       plural
   ~f       floating point
   ~e       scientific notation
   ~g       ~f or ~e, depending upon magnitude
   ~h       bigfloat
   ~a       uses Maxima function string
   ~s       like ~a, but output enclosed in "double quotes"
   ~~       ~
   ~<       justification, ~> terminates
   ~(       case conversion, ~) terminates 
   ~[       selection, ~] terminates 
   ~@{       iteration, ~@} terminates
@end example

Note that the selection directive @code{~[} is zero-indexed.
Also note that the directive ~* is not supported.

@c ===beg===
@c printf( false, "~a ~a ~4f ~a ~@@r", 
@c         "String",sym,bound,sqrt(12),144), bound = 1.234;
@c printf( false,"~@{~a ~@}",["one",2,"THREE"] );
@c printf( true,"~@{~@{~9,1f ~@}~%~@}",mat ),
@c         mat = args( matrix([1.1,2,3.33],[4,5,6],[7,8.88,9]) )$
@c control: "~:(~r~) bird~p ~[is~;are~] singing."$
@c printf( false,control, n,n,if n=1 then 0 else 1 ), n=2;
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) printf( false, "~a ~a ~4f ~a ~@@r", 
              "String",sym,bound,sqrt(12),144), bound = 1.234;
(%o1)                 String sym 1.23 2*sqrt(3) CXLIV
(%i2) printf( false,"~@{~a ~@}",["one",2,"THREE"] );
(%o2)                          one 2 THREE 
(%i3) printf(true,"~@{~@{~9,1f ~@}~%~@}",mat ),
          mat = args(matrix([1.1,2,3.33],[4,5,6],[7,8.88,9]))$
      1.1       2.0       3.3 
      4.0       5.0       6.0 
      7.0       8.9       9.0 
(%i4) control: "~:(~r~) bird~p ~[is~;are~] singing."$
(%i5) printf( false,control, n,n,if n=1 then 0 else 1 ), n=2;
(%o5)                    Two birds are singing.
@end example

If @var{dest} is a stream or @code{true}, then @code{printf} returns @code{false}.
Otherwise, @code{printf} returns a string containing the output.

@opencatbox
@category{File output} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} readline (@var{stream}) 
Returns a string containing the characters from the current position in @var{stream} up to the end of the line or @var{false} if the end of the file is encountered.

@opencatbox
@category{File input} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@c -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
@anchor{sprint}
@deffn {Function} sprint (@var{expr_1}, @dots{}, @var{expr_n})

Evaluates and displays its arguments one after the other `on a line' starting at
the leftmost position.  The numbers are printed with the '-' right next to the
number, and it disregards line length.  @code{newline()}, which will be
autoloaded from @code{stringproc.lisp} might be useful, if you whish to place
intermediate line breaking.

Example:

@c ===beg===
@c for n:0 thru 19 do sprint( fib(n) )$
@c for n:0 thru 22 do ( 
@c    sprint(fib(n)), if mod(n,10)=9 then newline() )$
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) for n:0 thru 19 do sprint( fib(n) )$
0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89 144 233 377 610 987 1597 2584 4181
(%i2) for n:0 thru 22 do ( 
         sprint(fib(n)), if mod(n,10)=9 then newline() )$
0 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 
55 89 144 233 377 610 987 1597 2584 4181 
6765 10946 17711 
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox
@end deffn

@node Functions and Variables for characters, Functions and Variables for strings, Functions and Variables for input and output, stringproc
@section Functions and Variables for characters

@deffn {Function} alphacharp (@var{char})    
Returns @code{true} if @var{char} is an alphabetic character. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} alphanumericp (@var{char}) 
Returns @code{true} if @var{char} is an alphabetic character or a digit. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} ascii (@var{int}) 
Returns the character corresponding to the ASCII number @var{int}.
( -1 < int < 256 )

@c ===beg===
@c for n from 0 thru 255 do ( 
@c    tmp: ascii(n), if alphacharp(tmp) then sprint(tmp), 
@c       if n=96 then newline() )$
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) for n from 0 thru 255 do ( 
   tmp: ascii(n), if alphacharp(tmp) then sprint(tmp),
      if n=96 then newline() )$
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z 
a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} cequal (@var{char_1}, @var{char_2})          
Returns @code{true} if @var{char_1} and @var{char_2} are the same. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} cequalignore (@var{char_1}, @var{char_2})    
Like @code{cequal} but ignores case. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} cgreaterp (@var{char_1}, @var{char_2})       
Returns @code{true} if the ASCII number of @var{char_1} is greater than the number of @var{char_2}. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} cgreaterpignore (@var{char_1}, @var{char_2})
Like @code{cgreaterp} but ignores case. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} charp (@var{obj}) 
Returns @code{true} if @var{obj} is a Maxima-character.
See introduction for example.

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} cint (@var{char}) 
Returns the ASCII number of @var{char}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} clessp (@var{char_1}, @var{char_2})
Returns @code{true} if the ASCII number of @var{char_1} is less than the number of @var{char_2}. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} clesspignore (@var{char_1}, @var{char_2})
Like @code{clessp} but ignores case. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} constituent (@var{char})   
Returns @code{true} if @var{char} is a graphic character and not the space character.
A graphic character is a character one can see, plus the space character.
(@code{constituent} is defined by Paul Graham, ANSI Common Lisp, 1996, page 67.)

@c ===beg===
@c for n from 0 thru 255 do ( 
@c    tmp: ascii(n), if constituent(tmp) then sprint(tmp) )$
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) for n from 0 thru 255 do ( 
tmp: ascii(n), if constituent(tmp) then sprint(tmp) )$
! " #  %  ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @@ A B
C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z [ \ ] ^ _ ` a b c
d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z @{ | @} ~
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} cunlisp (@var{lisp_char}) 
Converts a Lisp-character into a Maxima-character.
(You won't need it.)

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} digitcharp (@var{char})    
Returns @code{true} if @var{char} is a digit. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} lcharp (@var{obj}) 
Returns @code{true} if @var{obj} is a Lisp-character.
(You won't need it.)

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} lowercasep (@var{char})    
Returns @code{true} if @var{char} is a lowercase character. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@defvr {Variable} newline 
The newline character. 

@opencatbox
@category{Global variables} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end defvr

@defvr {Variable} space   
The space character.

@opencatbox
@category{Global variables} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end defvr

@defvr {Variable} tab     
The tab character.

@opencatbox
@category{Global variables} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end defvr

@deffn {Function} uppercasep (@var{char})    
Returns @code{true} if @var{char} is an uppercase character. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@node Functions and Variables for strings,  , Functions and Variables for characters, stringproc
@section Functions and Variables for strings

@deffn {Function} stringp (@var{obj}) 
Returns @code{true} if @var{obj} is a string.
See introduction for example.

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} charat (@var{string}, @var{n}) 
Returns the @var{n}-th character of @var{string}.
The first character in @var{string} is returned with @var{n} = 1.

@c ===beg===
@c charat("Lisp",1);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) charat("Lisp",1);
(%o1)                           L
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} charlist (@var{string}) 
Returns the list of all characters in @var{string}. 

@c ===beg===
@c charlist("Lisp");
@c %[1];
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) charlist("Lisp");
(%o1)                     [L, i, s, p]
(%i2) %[1];
(%o2)                           L
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} eval_string (@var{str})
Parse the string @var{str} as a Maxima expression and evaluate it.
The string @var{str} may or may not have a terminator (dollar sign @code{$} or semicolon @code{;}).
Only the first expression is parsed and evaluated, if there is more than one.

Complain if @var{str} is not a string.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c eval_string ("foo: 42; bar: foo^2 + baz");
@c eval_string ("(foo: 42, bar: foo^2 + baz)");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) eval_string ("foo: 42; bar: foo^2 + baz");
(%o1)                       42
(%i2) eval_string ("(foo: 42, bar: foo^2 + baz)");
(%o2)                   baz + 1764
@end example

See also @code{parse_string}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} parse_string (@var{str})
Parse the string @var{str} as a Maxima expression (do not evaluate it).
The string @var{str} may or may not have a terminator (dollar sign @code{$} or semicolon @code{;}).
Only the first expression is parsed, if there is more than one.

Complain if @var{str} is not a string.

Examples:

@c ===beg===
@c parse_string ("foo: 42; bar: foo^2 + baz");
@c parse_string ("(foo: 42, bar: foo^2 + baz)");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) parse_string ("foo: 42; bar: foo^2 + baz");
(%o1)                    foo : 42
(%i2) parse_string ("(foo: 42, bar: foo^2 + baz)");
                                   2
(%o2)          (foo : 42, bar : foo  + baz)
@end example

See also @code{eval_string}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} scopy (@var{string}) 
Returns a copy of @var{string} as a new string. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sdowncase (@var{string}) 
@deffnx {Function} sdowncase (@var{string}, @var{start}) 
@deffnx {Function} sdowncase (@var{string}, @var{start}, @var{end}) 
Like @code{supcase}, but uppercase characters are converted to lowercase. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sequal (@var{string_1}, @var{string_2}) 
Returns @code{true} if @var{string_1} and @var{string_2} are the same length and contain the same characters. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sequalignore (@var{string_1}, @var{string_2})
Like @code{sequal} but ignores case. 

@opencatbox
@category{Predicate functions} @category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sexplode (@var{string})
@code{sexplode} is an alias for function @code{charlist}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} simplode (@var{list})  
@deffnx {Function} simplode (@var{list}, @var{delim})  
@code{simplode} takes a list of expressions and concatenates them into a string.
If no delimiter @var{delim} is specified, @code{simplode} uses no delimiter.
@var{delim} can be any string.

@c ===beg===
@c simplode(["xx[",3,"]:",expand((x+y)^3)]);
@c simplode( sexplode("stars")," * " );
@c simplode( ["One","more","coffee."]," " );
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) simplode(["xx[",3,"]:",expand((x+y)^3)]);
(%o1)             xx[3]:y^3+3*x*y^2+3*x^2*y+x^3
(%i2) simplode( sexplode("stars")," * " );
(%o2)                   s * t * a * r * s
(%i3) simplode( ["One","more","coffee."]," " );
(%o3)                   One more coffee.
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sinsert (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{pos})  
Returns a string that is a concatenation of @code{substring (@var{string}, 1, @var{pos} - 1)},
the string @var{seq} and @code{substring (@var{string}, @var{pos})}.
Note that the first character in @var{string} is in position 1.

@c ===beg===
@c s: "A submarine."$
@c concat( substring(s,1,3),"yellow ",substring(s,3) );
@c sinsert("hollow ",s,3);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) s: "A submarine."$
(%i2) concat( substring(s,1,3),"yellow ",substring(s,3) );
(%o2)                  A yellow submarine.
(%i3) sinsert("hollow ",s,3);
(%o3)                  A hollow submarine.
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sinvertcase (@var{string})  
@deffnx {Function} sinvertcase (@var{string}, @var{start})  
@deffnx {Function} sinvertcase (@var{string}, @var{start}, @var{end})  
Returns @var{string} except that each character from position @var{start} to @var{end} is inverted.
If @var{end} is not given,
all characters from @var{start} to the end of @var{string} are replaced.

@c ===beg===
@c sinvertcase("sInvertCase");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) sinvertcase("sInvertCase");
(%o1)                      SiNVERTcASE
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} slength (@var{string}) 
Returns the number of characters in @var{string}. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} smake (@var{num}, @var{char}) 
Returns a new string with a number of @var{num} characters @var{char}. 

@c ===beg===
@c smake(3,"w");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) smake(3,"w");
(%o1)                          www
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} smismatch (@var{string_1}, @var{string_2}) 
@deffnx {Function} smismatch (@var{string_1}, @var{string_2}, @var{test}) 
Returns the position of the first character of @var{string_1} at which @var{string_1} and @var{string_2} differ or @code{false}.
Default test function for matching is @code{sequal}.
If @code{smismatch} should ignore case, use @code{sequalignore} as test.

@c ===beg===
@c smismatch("seven","seventh");
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) smismatch("seven","seventh");
(%o1)                           6
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} split (@var{string})  
@deffnx {Function} split (@var{string}, @var{delim})  
@deffnx {Function} split (@var{string}, @var{delim}, @var{multiple})  
Returns the list of all tokens in @var{string}.
Each token is an unparsed string.
@code{split} uses @var{delim} as delimiter.
If @var{delim} is not given, the space character is the default delimiter.
@var{multiple} is a boolean variable with @code{true} by default.
Multiple delimiters are read as one.
This is useful if tabs are saved as multiple space characters.
If @var{multiple} is set to @code{false}, each delimiter is noted.

@c ===beg===
@c split("1.2   2.3   3.4   4.5");
@c split("first;;third;fourth",";",false);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) split("1.2   2.3   3.4   4.5");
(%o1)                 [1.2, 2.3, 3.4, 4.5]
(%i2) split("first;;third;fourth",";",false);
(%o2)               [first, , third, fourth]
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sposition (@var{char}, @var{string}) 
Returns the position of the first character in @var{string} which matches @var{char}.
The first character in @var{string} is in position 1.
For matching characters ignoring case see @code{ssearch}.

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sremove (@var{seq}, @var{string})  
@deffnx {Function} sremove (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test})  
@deffnx {Function} sremove (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start})  
@deffnx {Function} sremove (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}, @var{end})  
Returns a string like @var{string} but without all substrings matching @var{seq}.
Default test function for matching is @code{sequal}.
If @code{sremove} should ignore case while searching for @var{seq}, use @code{sequalignore} as test.
Use @var{start} and @var{end} to limit searching.
Note that the first character in @var{string} is in position 1.

@c ===beg===
@c sremove("n't","I don't like coffee.");
@c sremove ("DO ",%,'sequalignore);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) sremove("n't","I don't like coffee.");
(%o1)                   I do like coffee.
(%i2) sremove ("DO ",%,'sequalignore);
(%o2)                    I like coffee.
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sremovefirst (@var{seq}, @var{string})  
@deffnx {Function} sremovefirst (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test})  
@deffnx {Function} sremovefirst (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start})  
@deffnx {Function} sremovefirst (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}, @var{end})  
Like @code{sremove} except that only the first substring that matches @code{seq} is removed. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} sreverse (@var{string}) 
Returns a string with all the characters of @var{string} in reverse order. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} ssearch (@var{seq}, @var{string})  
@deffnx {Function} ssearch (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test})  
@deffnx {Function} ssearch (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start})  
@deffnx {Function} ssearch (@var{seq}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}, @var{end})
Returns the position of the first substring of @var{string} that matches the string @var{seq}.
Default test function for matching is @code{sequal}.
If @code{ssearch} should ignore case, use @code{sequalignore} as test.
Use @var{start} and @var{end} to limit searching.
Note that the first character in @var{string} is in position 1.

@example
(%i1) ssearch("~s","~@{~S ~@}~%",'sequalignore);
(%o1)                                  4
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} ssort (@var{string}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssort (@var{string}, @var{test}) 
Returns a string that contains all characters from @var{string} in an order such there are no two successive characters @var{c} and @var{d} such that @code{test (@var{c}, @var{d})} is @code{false} and @code{test (@var{d}, @var{c})} is @code{true}.
Default test function for sorting is @var{clessp}.
The set of test functions is @code{@{clessp, clesspignore, cgreaterp, cgreaterpignore, cequal, cequalignore@}}.

@c ===beg===
@c ssort("I don't like Mondays.");
@c ssort("I don't like Mondays.",'cgreaterpignore);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) ssort("I don't like Mondays.");
(%o1)                    '.IMaddeiklnnoosty
(%i2) ssort("I don't like Mondays.",'cgreaterpignore);
(%o2)                 ytsoonnMlkIiedda.'   
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} ssubst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssubst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}, @var{test}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssubst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssubst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}, @var{end}) 
Returns a string like @var{string} except that all substrings matching @var{old} are replaced by @var{new}.
@var{old} and @var{new} need not to be of the same length.
Default test function for matching is @code{sequal}.
If @code{ssubst} should ignore case while searching for old, use @code{sequalignore} as test.
Use @var{start} and @var{end} to limit searching.
Note that the first character in @var{string} is in position 1.

@c ===beg===
@c ssubst("like","hate","I hate Thai food. I hate green tea.");
@c ssubst("Indian","thai",%,'sequalignore,8,12);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) ssubst("like","hate","I hate Thai food. I hate green tea.");
(%o1)          I like Thai food. I like green tea.
(%i2) ssubst("Indian","thai",%,'sequalignore,8,12);
(%o2)         I like Indian food. I like green tea.
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} ssubstfirst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssubstfirst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}, @var{test}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssubstfirst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}) 
@deffnx {Function} ssubstfirst (@var{new}, @var{old}, @var{string}, @var{test}, @var{start}, @var{end}) 
Like @code{subst} except that only the first substring that matches @var{old} is replaced. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} strim (@var{seq},@var{string}) 
Returns a string like @var{string},
but with all characters that appear in @var{seq} removed from both ends. 

@c ===beg===
@c "/* comment */"$
@c strim(" /*",%);
@c slength(%);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) "/* comment */"$
(%i2) strim(" /*",%);
(%o2)                        comment
(%i3) slength(%);
(%o3)                           7
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} striml (@var{seq}, @var{string}) 
Like @code{strim} except that only the left end of @var{string} is trimmed. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} strimr (@var{seq}, @var{string}) 
Like @code{strim} except that only the right end of string is trimmed. 

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} substring (@var{string}, @var{start})
@deffnx {Function} substring (@var{string}, @var{start}, @var{end}) 
Returns the substring of @var{string} beginning at position @var{start} and ending at position @var{end}.
The character at position @var{end} is not included.
If @var{end} is not given, the substring contains the rest of the string.
Note that the first character in @var{string} is in position 1.

@c ===beg===
@c substring("substring",4);
@c substring(%,4,6);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) substring("substring",4);
(%o1)                        string
(%i2) substring(%,4,6);
(%o2)                          in
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} supcase (@var{string}) 
@deffnx {Function} supcase (@var{string}, @var{start}) 
@deffnx {Function} supcase (@var{string}, @var{start}, @var{end}) 
Returns @var{string} except that lowercase characters from position @var{start} to @var{end} are replaced by the corresponding uppercase ones.
If @var{end} is not given,
all lowercase characters from @var{start} to the end of @var{string} are replaced.

@c ===beg===
@c supcase("english",1,2);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) supcase("english",1,2);
(%o1)                        English
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn

@deffn {Function} tokens (@var{string}) 
@deffnx {Function} tokens (@var{string}, @var{test}) 
Returns a list of tokens, which have been extracted from @var{string}.
The tokens are substrings whose characters satisfy a certain test function.
If test is not given, @var{constituent} is used as the default test.
@code{@{constituent, alphacharp, digitcharp, lowercasep, uppercasep, charp, characterp, alphanumericp@}} is the set of test functions. 
(The Lisp-version of @code{tokens} is written by Paul Graham. ANSI Common Lisp, 1996, page 67.)

@c ===beg===
@c tokens("24 October 2005");
@c tokens("05-10-24",'digitcharp);
@c map(parse_string,%);
@c ===end===
@example
(%i1) tokens("24 October 2005");
(%o1)                  [24, October, 2005]
(%i2) tokens("05-10-24",'digitcharp);
(%o2)                     [05, 10, 24]
(%i3) map(parse_string,%);
(%o3)                      [5, 10, 24]
@end example

@opencatbox
@category{Package stringproc}
@closecatbox

@end deffn
