@table @code
@item GNUTLS_E_AGAIN:
Resource temporarily unavailable, try again.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_DER_ERROR:
ASN1 parser: Error in DER parsing.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_DER_OVERFLOW:
ASN1 parser: Overflow in DER parsing.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_ELEMENT_NOT_FOUND:
ASN1 parser: Element was not found.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_GENERIC_ERROR:
ASN1 parser: Generic parsing error.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_IDENTIFIER_NOT_FOUND:
ASN1 parser: Identifier was not found

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_SYNTAX_ERROR:
ASN1 parser: Syntax error.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_TAG_ERROR:
ASN1 parser: Error in TAG.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_TAG_IMPLICIT:
ASN1 parser: error in implicit tag

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_TYPE_ANY_ERROR:
ASN1 parser: Error in type 'ANY'.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_VALUE_NOT_FOUND:
ASN1 parser: Value was not found.

@item GNUTLS_E_ASN1_VALUE_NOT_VALID:
ASN1 parser: Value is not valid.

@item GNUTLS_E_BASE64_DECODING_ERROR:
Base64 decoding error.

@item GNUTLS_E_BASE64_ENCODING_ERROR:
Base64 encoding error.

@item GNUTLS_E_BASE64_UNEXPECTED_HEADER_ERROR:
Base64 unexpected header error.

@item GNUTLS_E_CERTIFICATE_ERROR:
Error in the certificate.

@item GNUTLS_E_CERTIFICATE_KEY_MISMATCH:
The certificate and the given key do not match.

@item GNUTLS_E_CHANNEL_BINDING_NOT_AVAILABLE:
Channel binding data not available

@item GNUTLS_E_COMPRESSION_FAILED:
Compression of the TLS record packet has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_CONSTRAINT_ERROR:
Some constraint limits were reached.

@item GNUTLS_E_CRYPTODEV_DEVICE_ERROR:
Error opening /dev/crypto

@item GNUTLS_E_CRYPTODEV_IOCTL_ERROR:
Error interfacing with /dev/crypto

@item GNUTLS_E_CRYPTO_ALREADY_REGISTERED:
There is already a crypto algorithm with lower priority.

@item GNUTLS_E_CRYPTO_INIT_FAILED:
The initialization of crypto backend has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_DB_ERROR:
Error in Database backend.

@item GNUTLS_E_DECOMPRESSION_FAILED:
Decompression of the TLS record packet has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_DECRYPTION_FAILED:
Decryption has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_DH_PRIME_UNACCEPTABLE:
The Diffie-Hellman prime sent by the server is not acceptable (not long enough).

@item GNUTLS_E_ENCRYPTION_FAILED:
Encryption has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_ERROR_IN_FINISHED_PACKET:
An error was encountered at the TLS Finished packet calculation.

@item GNUTLS_E_EXPIRED:
The requested session has expired.

@item GNUTLS_E_FATAL_ALERT_RECEIVED:
A TLS fatal alert has been received.

@item GNUTLS_E_FILE_ERROR:
Error while reading file.

@item GNUTLS_E_GOT_APPLICATION_DATA:
TLS Application data were received, while expecting handshake data.

@item GNUTLS_E_HANDSHAKE_TOO_LARGE:
The handshake data size is too large (DoS?), check gnutls_handshake_set_max_packet_length().

@item GNUTLS_E_HASH_FAILED:
Hashing has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_IA_VERIFY_FAILED:
Verifying TLS/IA phase checksum failed

@item GNUTLS_E_ILLEGAL_SRP_USERNAME:
The SRP username supplied is illegal.

@item GNUTLS_E_INCOMPATIBLE_GCRYPT_LIBRARY:
The gcrypt library version is too old.

@item GNUTLS_E_INCOMPATIBLE_LIBTASN1_LIBRARY:
The tasn1 library version is too old.

@item GNUTLS_E_INCOMPAT_DSA_KEY_WITH_TLS_PROTOCOL:
The given DSA key is incompatible with the selected TLS protocol.

@item GNUTLS_E_INIT_LIBEXTRA:
The initialization of GnuTLS-extra has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_INSUFFICIENT_CREDENTIALS:
Insufficient credentials for that request.

@item GNUTLS_E_INTERNAL_ERROR:
GnuTLS internal error.

@item GNUTLS_E_INTERRUPTED:
Function was interrupted.

@item GNUTLS_E_INVALID_PASSWORD:
The given password contains invalid characters.

@item GNUTLS_E_INVALID_REQUEST:
The request is invalid.

@item GNUTLS_E_INVALID_SESSION:
The specified session has been invalidated for some reason.

@item GNUTLS_E_KEY_USAGE_VIOLATION:
Key usage violation in certificate has been detected.

@item GNUTLS_E_LARGE_PACKET:
A large TLS record packet was received.

@item GNUTLS_E_LIBRARY_VERSION_MISMATCH:
The GnuTLS library version does not match the GnuTLS-extra library version.

@item GNUTLS_E_LOCKING_ERROR:
Thread locking error

@item GNUTLS_E_LZO_INIT_FAILED:
The initialization of LZO has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_MAC_VERIFY_FAILED:
The Message Authentication Code verification failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_MEMORY_ERROR:
Internal error in memory allocation.

@item GNUTLS_E_MPI_PRINT_FAILED:
Could not export a large integer.

@item GNUTLS_E_MPI_SCAN_FAILED:
The scanning of a large integer has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_NO_CERTIFICATE_FOUND:
The peer did not send any certificate.

@item GNUTLS_E_NO_CIPHER_SUITES:
No supported cipher suites have been found.

@item GNUTLS_E_NO_COMPRESSION_ALGORITHMS:
No supported compression algorithms have been found.

@item GNUTLS_E_NO_TEMPORARY_DH_PARAMS:
No temporary DH parameters were found.

@item GNUTLS_E_NO_TEMPORARY_RSA_PARAMS:
No temporary RSA parameters were found.

@item GNUTLS_E_OPENPGP_FINGERPRINT_UNSUPPORTED:
The OpenPGP fingerprint is not supported.

@item GNUTLS_E_OPENPGP_GETKEY_FAILED:
Could not get OpenPGP key.

@item GNUTLS_E_OPENPGP_KEYRING_ERROR:
Error loading the keyring.

@item GNUTLS_E_OPENPGP_PREFERRED_KEY_ERROR:
The OpenPGP key has not a preferred key set.

@item GNUTLS_E_OPENPGP_SUBKEY_ERROR:
Could not find OpenPGP subkey.

@item GNUTLS_E_OPENPGP_UID_REVOKED:
The OpenPGP User ID is revoked.

@item GNUTLS_E_PARSING_ERROR:
Error in parsing.

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_ATTRIBUTE_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in attribute

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_DATA_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in data

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_DEVICE_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in device

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error.

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_KEY_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in key

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_LOAD_ERROR:
PKCS #11 initialization error.

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_PIN_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in PIN.

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_PIN_EXPIRED:
PKCS #11 PIN expired

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_PIN_LOCKED:
PKCS #11 PIN locked

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_SESSION_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in session

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_SIGNATURE_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in signature

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_SLOT_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in slot

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_TOKEN_ERROR:
PKCS #11 error in token

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_UNSUPPORTED_FEATURE_ERROR:
PKCS #11 unsupported feature

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS11_USER_ERROR:
PKCS #11 user error

@item GNUTLS_E_PKCS1_WRONG_PAD:
Wrong padding in PKCS1 packet.

@item GNUTLS_E_PK_DECRYPTION_FAILED:
Public key decryption has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_PK_ENCRYPTION_FAILED:
Public key encryption has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_PK_SIGN_FAILED:
Public key signing has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_PK_SIG_VERIFY_FAILED:
Public key signature verification has failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_PULL_ERROR:
Error in the pull function.

@item GNUTLS_E_PUSH_ERROR:
Error in the push function.

@item GNUTLS_E_RANDOM_FAILED:
Failed to acquire random data.

@item GNUTLS_E_RECEIVED_ILLEGAL_EXTENSION:
An illegal TLS extension was received.

@item GNUTLS_E_RECEIVED_ILLEGAL_PARAMETER:
An illegal parameter has been received.

@item GNUTLS_E_RECORD_LIMIT_REACHED:
The upper limit of record packet sequence numbers has been reached. Wow!

@item GNUTLS_E_REHANDSHAKE:
Rehandshake was requested by the peer.

@item GNUTLS_E_REQUESTED_DATA_NOT_AVAILABLE:
The requested data were not available.

@item GNUTLS_E_SAFE_RENEGOTIATION_FAILED:
Safe renegotiation failed.

@item GNUTLS_E_SHORT_MEMORY_BUFFER:
The given memory buffer is too short to hold parameters.

@item GNUTLS_E_SRP_PWD_ERROR:
Error in password file.

@item GNUTLS_E_SRP_PWD_PARSING_ERROR:
Parsing error in password file.

@item GNUTLS_E_SUCCESS:
Success.

@item GNUTLS_E_TOO_MANY_EMPTY_PACKETS:
Too many empty record packets have been received.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNEXPECTED_HANDSHAKE_PACKET:
An unexpected TLS handshake packet was received.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNEXPECTED_PACKET:
An unexpected TLS packet was received.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNEXPECTED_PACKET_LENGTH:
A TLS packet with unexpected length was received.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_ALGORITHM:
The specified algorithm or protocol is unknown.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_CIPHER_SUITE:
Could not negotiate a supported cipher suite.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_CIPHER_TYPE:
The cipher type is unsupported.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_COMPRESSION_ALGORITHM:
Could not negotiate a supported compression method.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_HASH_ALGORITHM:
The hash algorithm is unknown.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_PKCS_BAG_TYPE:
The PKCS structure's bag type is unknown.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_PKCS_CONTENT_TYPE:
The PKCS structure's content type is unknown.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_PK_ALGORITHM:
An unknown public key algorithm was encountered.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNKNOWN_SRP_USERNAME:
The SRP username supplied is unknown.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNSAFE_RENEGOTIATION_DENIED:
Unsafe renegotiation denied.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNSUPPORTED_CERTIFICATE_TYPE:
The certificate type is not supported.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNSUPPORTED_SIGNATURE_ALGORITHM:
The signature algorithm is not supported.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNSUPPORTED_VERSION_PACKET:
A record packet with illegal version was received.

@item GNUTLS_E_UNWANTED_ALGORITHM:
An algorithm that is not enabled was negotiated.

@item GNUTLS_E_WARNING_ALERT_RECEIVED:
A TLS warning alert has been received.

@item GNUTLS_E_WARNING_IA_FPHF_RECEIVED:
Received a TLS/IA Final Phase Finished message

@item GNUTLS_E_WARNING_IA_IPHF_RECEIVED:
Received a TLS/IA Intermediate Phase Finished message

@item GNUTLS_E_X509_UNKNOWN_SAN:
Unknown Subject Alternative name in X.509 certificate.

@item GNUTLS_E_X509_UNSUPPORTED_ATTRIBUTE:
The certificate has unsupported attributes.

@item GNUTLS_E_X509_UNSUPPORTED_CRITICAL_EXTENSION:
Unsupported critical extension in X.509 certificate.

@item GNUTLS_E_X509_UNSUPPORTED_OID:
The OID is not supported.

@end table
