.TH certtool 1 "May 23rd 2005"
.SH NAME
certtool \- Manipulate certificates and keys.
.SH SYNOPSIS
certtool [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Generate X.509 certificates, certificate requests, and private keys.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Program control options
.IP "\-d, \-\-debug LEVEL"
Specify the debug level. Default is 1.
.IP "\-h, \-\-help"
Shows this help text
.IP "\-v, \-\-version"
Shows the program's version

.SS Getting information on X.509 certificates
.IP "\-i, \-\-certificate\-info"
Print information on a certificate.
.IP "\-k, \-\-key\-info"
Print information on a private key.
.IP "\-l, \-\-crl\-info"
Print information on a CRL.
.IP "\-\-p12\-info"
Print information on a PKCS #12 structure.

.SS Getting information on Openpgp certificates
.IP "\-\-pgp\-\-certificate\-info"
Print information on an OpenPGP certificate.
.IP "\-\-pgp\-\-key\-info"
Print information on an OpenPGP private key.
.IP "\-\-pgp\-\-ring\-info"
Print information on a keyring.

.SS Generating/verifying X.509 certificates/keys
.IP "\-c, \-\-generate\-certificate"
Generate a signed certificate.
.IP "\-e, \-\-verify\-chain"
Verify a PEM encoded certificate chain.  The last certificate in the chain must be a self signed one.
.IP "\-\-generate\-dh\-params"
Generate PKCS #3 encoded Diffie-Hellman parameters.
.IP "\-\-load\-ca\-certificate FILE"
Certificate authority's certificate file to use.
.IP "\-\-load\-ca\-privkey FILE"
Certificate authority's private key file or PKCS #11 URL to use.
.IP "\-\-load\-certificate FILE"
Certificate file to use.
.IP "\-\-load\-privkey FILE"
Private key file  or PKCS #11 URL to use.
.IP "\-\-load\-pubkey FILE"
Public key file  or PKCS #11 URL to use.
.IP "\-\-load\-request FILE"
Certificate request file to use.
.IP "\-p, \-\-generate\-privkey"
Generate a private key.
.IP "\-q, \-\-generate\-request"
Generate a PKCS #10 certificate request.
.IP "\-s, \-\-generate\-self\-signed"
Generate a self-signed certificate.
.IP "\-u, \-\-update\-certificate"
Update a signed certificate.

.SS Controlling output
.IP "\-8, \-\-pkcs8"
Use PKCS #8 format for private keys.
.IP "\-\-pkcs-cipher"
The cipher to use when doing pkcs encryption. Valid options are
3des,aes-128,aes-192,aes-256,rc2-40
.IP "\-\-dsa"
Generate a DSA key.
.IP "\-\-bits BITS"
Specify the number of bits for key generation.
.IP "\-\-export\-ciphers"
Use weak encryption algorithms.
.IP "\-\-inraw"
Use RAW/DER format for input certificates and private keys.
.IP "\-\-infile FILE"
Input file.
.IP "\-\-outraw"
Use RAW/DER format for output certificates and private keys.
.IP "\-\-outfile FILE"
Output file.
.IP "\-\-password PASSWORD"
Password to use.
.IP "\-\-to\-p12"
Generate a PKCS #12 structure.
.IP "\-\-template"
Use a template file to read input. See the doc/certtool.cfg
in the distribution, for an example.
.IP "\-\-fix\-key"
Some previous versions of certtool generated wrongly the
optional parameters in a private key. This may affect
programs that used them. To fix an old private key use
\-\-key\-info in combination with this parameter.
.IP "\-\-v1"
When generating a certificate use the X.509 version 1 format.
This does not add any extensions (such as indication for a CA)
but some programs do need these.

.SH EXAMPLES
To create a private key, run:

.RS
.nf
$ certtool \-\-generate\-privkey \-\-outfile key.pem
.fi
.RE

To create a certificate request (needed when the certificate is issued by
another party), run:

.RS
.nf
$ certtool \-\-generate\-request \-\-load\-privkey key.pem \\
   \-\-outfile request.pem
.fi
.RE

To create a certificate request using a key stored in a PKCS #11
token, run:

.RS
.nf
$ ./certtool \-\-generate-request \-\-load-privkey "pkcs11:..." \\
  \-\-load-pubkey "pkcs11:..." \-\-outfile request.pem
.fi
.RE

To generate a certificate using the previous request, use the command:

.RS
.nf
$ certtool \-\-generate\-certificate \-\-load\-request request.pem \\
   \-\-outfile cert.pem \-\-load\-ca\-certificate ca\-cert.pem \\
   \-\-load\-ca\-privkey ca\-key.pem
.fi
.RE

To generate a certificate using the private key only, use the command:

.RS
.nf
$ certtool \-\-generate\-certificate \-\-load\-privkey key.pem \\
   \-\-outfile cert.pem \-\-load\-ca\-certificate ca\-cert.pem \\
   \-\-load\-ca\-privkey ca\-key.pem
.fi
.RE

To view the certificate information, use:

.RS
.nf
$ certtool \-\-certificate\-info \-\-infile cert.pem
.fi
.RE

To generate a PKCS #12 structure using the previous key and certificate, use the command:

.RS
.nf
$ certtool \-\-load\-certificate cert.pem \-\-load\-privkey key.pem \\
   \-\-to\-p12 \-\-outder \-\-outfile key.p12
.fi
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Nikos Mavrogiannopoulos <nmav@gnutls.org> and others; see
/usr/share/doc/gnutls\-bin/AUTHORS for a complete list.
.PP
This manual page was written by Ivo Timmermans <ivo@debian.org>, for
the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
