.TH srptool 1 "February 21st 2005"
.SH NAME
srptool \- Simple SRP password tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
srptool [\fIoptions\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Very simple program that emulates the programs in the Stanford SRP
(Secure Remote Password) libraries using GnuTLS.
It is intended for use in places where you don't expect SRP
authentication to be the used for system users.

In brief, to use SRP you need to create two files. These are 
the password file that holds the users and the verifiers associated with them
and the configuration file to hold the group parameters 
(called tpasswd.conf).
.SH OPTIONS
.IP "\-\-bits \fIBITS\fR"
specify the number of bits for prime numbers (used only when the
\fB\-\-create\-conf\fR option is used).
.IP "\-\-create\-conf \fIFILE\fR"
Generate a tpasswd.conf file.
.IP "\-h, \-\-help"
Prints a short reminder of the command line options.
.IP "\-i, \-\-index \fIINDEX\fR"
Specify the index of the parameters in tpasswd.conf to use.
.IP "\-p, \-\-passwd \fIFILE\fR"
Specify a password file.
.IP "\-c, \-\-passwd\-conf \fIFILE\fR"
Specify a password configuration file.
.IP "\-s, \-\-salt \fISALT\fR"
Specify salt size for crypt algorithm.
.IP "\-u, \-\-username \fIusername\fR"
Specify username.
.IP "\-\-verify"
Just verify password.
.SH EXAMPLES
To create tpasswd.conf which holds the g and n values for SRP protocol
(generator and a large prime), run:

.RS
.nf
$ srptool \-\-create\-conf /etc/tpasswd.conf
.fi
.RE

This command will create /etc/tpasswd and will add user 'test' (you
will also be prompted for a password). Verifiers are stored by default
in the way libsrp expects.

.RS
.nf
$ srptool \-\-passwd /etc/tpasswd \\
    \-\-passwd\-conf /etc/tpasswd.conf \-u test
.fi
.RE

This command will check against a password. If the password matches
the one in /etc/tpasswd you will get an ok.

.RS
.nf
$ srptool \-\-passwd /etc/tpasswd \\
    \-\-passwd\-conf /etc/tpasswd.conf \-\-verify \-u test
.fi
.RE

.SH AUTHOR
.PP
Nikos Mavrogiannopoulos <nmav@gnutls.org> and others; see
/usr/share/doc/gnutls\-bin/AUTHORS for a complete list.
.PP
This manual page was written by Ivo Timmermans <ivo@debian.org>, for
the Debian GNU/Linux system (but may be used by others).
