'\" t
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/widgets/Object.3,v 1.3 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\" This file is part of the GNU LessTif Library.
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" 
.TH Object 3 "October 1998" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
Object \- X Toolkit base object
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <X11/Intrinsic.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Object
is a widget which is defined in the X Toolkit.
We document its existence here for completeness.
Please refer to the X Window System documentation for
the real information regarding this widget.
.SH X RESOURCES
.TS
tab(;);
l l l l l.
Name;Class;Type;Default;Access
_
XtNdestroyCallback;XtCCallback;Callback;NULL;CSG
.TE
.PP
.BR XtNdestroyCallback
.PP
.SH CLASS HIERARCHY
.BR Object (3)
.SH CALLBACKS
.SH CONVENIENCE FUNCTIONS
.SH SEE ALSO
