.\"
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/widgets/VendorShell.3,v 1.2 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\" This file is part of the GNU LessTif Library.
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" 
.TH VendorShell 3 "October 1998" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
VendorShell \- replaces VendorShell from the X toolkit
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <X11/Shell.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
VendorShell
is a widget which is defined in the X Toolkit.
When compiling and linking applications using e.g. the Athena Widget set,
the X Toolkit VendorShell widget is used.
.PP
In applications using Motif or LessTif,
an implementation of VendorShell that is specific to Motif or LessTif
is used instead.
.PP
Therefore we do not document the X Toolkit VendorShell widget here.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR XmVendorShell (3)
