'\" t
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/widgets/XmDialogShell.3,v 1.6 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\" This file is part of the GNU LessTif Library.
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" 
.TH XmDialogShell 3 "April 1998" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
XmDialogShell \- Motif-compatible modal-dialog shell widget
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <Xm/DialogS.h>
.PP
.B XmDialogShell
.PP
.B XmCreateDialogShell
.SH DESCRIPTION
XmDialogShell
is a Shell widget, which means its main purpose is to interface between
the application and the window manager.
.PP
XmDialogShell specifically interfaces between
.BR XmBulletinBoard (3x)
and its subclasses and the window manager.
More information on this is found in the
.BR XmBulletinBoard (3x)
documentation.
.PP
An instance of this class is created on the fly when some convenience
functions are called.
In these cases, two (or more) widgets are actually created,
and the return value of the function is the widget ID of the
widget which is a child of the dialog shell.
This is a grandchild of the widget whose ID was passed to the function.
.SH X RESOURCES
.TS
tab(;);
l l l l l.
Name;Class;Type;Default;Access
_
.TE
.PP
.SH CLASS HIERARCHY
.BR Object (3)
.BR Rect (3)
.BR UnNamedObj (3)
.BR Core (3)
.BR Composite (3)
.BR Shell (3)
.BR WMShell (3)
.BR VendorShell (3)
.BR TransientShell (3)
.BR XmDialogShell (3)
.SH CALLBACKS
.SH CONVENIENCE FUNCTIONS
.BR XmCreateBulletinBoardDialog (3x)
.BR XmCreateFormDialog (3x)
.BR XmCreateMessageDialog (3x)
.BR XmCreateQuestionDialog (3x)
.BR XmCreateWarningDialog (3x)
.BR XmCreateErrorDialog (3x)
.BR XmCreateWorkingDialog (3x)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR XmBulletinBoard (3x)
