'\" t
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/widgets/XmNotebook.3,v 1.5 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1997-1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" 
.\" This file is part of the GNU LessTif Library.
.\" This library is free software; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License as published by the Free Software Foundation; either
.\" version 2 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\" 
.\" This library is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
.\" Library General Public License for more details.
.\" 
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU Library General Public
.\" License along with this library; if not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\" 
.TH XmNotebook 3 "April 1998" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
XmNotebook \- a widget that allows a user to manipulate underlying widgets
like pages of a book.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <Xm/Notebook.h>
.PP
.B XmNotebook
.PP
.B XmCreateNotebook
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR XmNotebook
is a widget that allows presenting underlying widgets like pages of a book.
Major and minor tabs can be associated with pages,
and a scroller is presented to move to the next or previous page.
.PP
.BR XmNotebook 
presents itself as a physical notebook with a spiral to keep the book together.
This default can be overruled by replacing it with another image.
.SH X RESOURCES
.TS
tab(;);
l l l l l.
Name;Class;Type;Default;Access
_
XmNbackPageForeground;XmCBackPageForeground;Pixel;NULL;CSG
XmNbackPageNumber;XmCBackPageNumber;Int;2;CSG
XmNbackPagePlacement;XmCBackPagePlacement;ScrollBarPlacement;NULL;CSG
XmNbackPageSize;XmCBackPageSize;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNbindingPixmap;XmCBindingPixmap;Pixmap;NULL;CSG
XmNbindingType;XmCBindingType;BindingType;NULL;CSG
XmNbindingWidth;XmCBindingWidth;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNfirstPageNumber;XmCFirstPageNumber;Int;1;CSG
XmNlastPageNumber;XmCLastPageNumber;Int;NULL;CSG
XmNframeBackground;XmCFrameBackground;Pixel;NULL;CSG
XmNbackPageBackground;XmCBackPageBackground;Pixel;NULL;CSG
XmNframeShadowThickness;XmCFrameShadowThickness;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNinnerMarginHeight;XmCInnerMarginHeight;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNinnerMarginWidth;XmCInnerMarginWidth;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNminorTabSpacing;XmCMinorTabSpacing;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNmajorTabSpacing;XmCMajorTabSpacing;Dimension;NULL;CSG
XmNorientation;XmCOrientation;Orientation;NULL;CSG
XmNpageChangedCallback;XmCPageChangedCallback;Callback;NULL;CSG
.TE
.PP
.BR XmNbackPageForeground
.PP
.BR XmNbackPageNumber
.PP
.BR XmNbackPagePlacement
.PP
.BR XmNbackPageSize
.PP
.BR XmNbindingPixmap
.PP
.BR XmNbindingType
.PP
.BR XmNbindingWidth
.PP
.BR XmNfirstPageNumber
.PP
.BR XmNlastPageNumber
.PP
.BR XmNframeBackground
.PP
.BR XmNbackPageBackground
.PP
.BR XmNframeShadowThickness
.PP
.BR XmNinnerMarginHeight
.PP
.BR XmNinnerMarginWidth
.PP
.BR XmNminorTabSpacing
.PP
.BR XmNmajorTabSpacing
.PP
.BR XmNorientation
.PP
.BR XmNpageChangedCallback
.PP
.SH CLASS HIERARCHY
.BR Object (3)
.BR Rect (3)
.BR UnNamedObj (3)
.BR Core (3)
.BR Composite (3)
.BR Constraint (3)
.BR XmManager (3)
.BR XmNotebook (3)
.SH CALLBACKS
.RS
  typedef struct { 
    int reason;
    XEvent *event;
    int page_number;
    Widget page_widget;
    int prev_page_number;
    Widget prev_page_widget;
  } XmNotebookCallbackStruct;
.RE
.PP
.SH CONVENIENCE FUNCTIONS
.SH SEE ALSO
