.\"
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/clients/lesstif.1,v 1.19 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" Copyright (C) 2000-2002 LessTif Development Team
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License with
.\" your Debian GNU/Linux system, in /usr/doc/copyright/GPL, or with the
.\" dpkg source package as the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH LessTif 1x "March 2002" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"

.SH NAME
LessTif \- an open-source Motif replacement


.SH SUMMARY
.BR LessTif
is a free replacement for OSF/Motif\(rg.
.PP
As with Motif\(rg, LessTif consists of a widget set, a window manager,
and a UIL implementation (libMrm and the UIL compiler).
In LessTif, our main area of attention is the widget set.
We also have a working window manager mwm,
but UIL is not under very active development.
.PP
LessTif is licensed under the LGPL, the Library Gnu Public License.
The license itself accompanies LessTif in the file COPYING.LIB.
More information can be obtained from the Free Software Foundation.


.SH DEBUGGING
For more info on Debugging check out our documentation in
HTML format.


.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.IP DEBUG_SOURCES
Colon-separated list of files from which debug output
is generated. Special values "all"/"none" have obvious meaning.
To block entries from a list, add a "-" prefix.
You may use an asterisk "*" as a wildcard as well.

.IP DEBUG_FILE
If this variable exists, then the file is being used for output.
If "%p" is part of the value of DEBUG_FILE, then it is replaced by the
current process id.

.IP DEBUG_PRINT_WIDGETID
If this variable exists, then all widgets printed
with XdbDebug() etc. will also print their widget ID.
If the variable doesn't exist, then they only print
their name for identification.

.IP DEBUG_REDIRECT_XMWARNING
If this variable exists any output of _XmWarning()
and equivalent functions is sent to the file specified by
.BR DEBUG_FILE 

.IP DEBUG_SIGNAL
Specifies the name of the signal which should
be used to switch the built-in LessTif debugging system.
Valid values depend on the system on which LessTif was compiled
and is running and are a subset of:

SIGUNUSED, SIGUSR1, SIGUSR2, SIGUSR3, SIGBREAK

.IP DEBUG_TOGGLE
Specifies the initial status of the built-in LessTif debugging system.
Valid values are 'on' and 'off'

.SH INTERFACES
The following interfaces exist to Set, Toggle and Query the
current status of the debugging subsystem:

void
.BR _LtDebugSet
(Boolean flag);

void
.BR _LtDebugToggle
(void);

Boolean
.BR _LtDebugQueryState
(void);



.SH SOURCE CODE
The major part of the source code which implements the
debugging system of LessTif resides in
.IR /lib/Xm/DebugUtil.c
Using the preprocessor define
.IR LESSTIF_PRODUCTION
the relevant code sections are en-/disabled during the build process.

 
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR "Clients":
.RS
.BR mwm (1)
.BR uil (1)
.BR xmbind (1)
.RE
.PP
.BR "Tools":
.RS
.BR ltversion (1)
.RE
.PP
.BR "Other Widget Sets":
.RS
.BR xbae (1)
.BR xlt (1)
.RE
.PP
.BR "Motif Widgets":
.RS
.PP
.BR XmFileSelectionBox (3)
.BR XmArrowButton (3)
.BR XmArrowButtonGadget (3)
.BR XmBulletinBoard (3)
.BR XmCascadeButton (3)
.BR XmCascadeButtonGCacheObj (3)
.BR XmCascadeButtonGadget (3)
.BR XmComboBox (3)
.BR XmCommand (3)
.BR XmDesktop (3)
.BR XmDialogShell (3)
.BR XmDialogShellExt (3)
.BR XmDisplay (3)
.BR XmDragContext (3)
.BR XmDragIcon (3)
.BR XmDragOverShell (3)
.BR XmDrawingArea (3)
.BR XmDrawnButton (3)
.BR XmDropSiteManager (3)
.BR XmDropTransfer (3)
.BR XmFileSelectionBox (3)
.BR XmForm (3)
.BR XmFrame (3)
.BR XmGadget (3)
.BR XmGrabShell (3)
.BR XmIconGCacheObj (3)
.BR XmIconGadget (3)
.BR XmLabel (3)
.BR XmLabelGCacheObj (3)
.BR XmLabelGadget (3)
.BR XmList (3)
.BR XmMainWindow (3)
.BR XmManager (3)
.BR XmMenuShell (3)
.BR XmMessageBox (3)
.BR XmNotebook (3)
.BR XmPanedWindow (3)
.BR XmPrimitive (3)
.BR XmProtocol (3)
.BR XmPushButton (3)
.BR XmPushButtonGCacheObj (3)
.BR XmPushButtonGadget (3)
.BR XmRowColumn (3)
.BR XmSash (3)
.BR XmScale (3)
.BR XmScreen (3)
.BR XmScrollBar (3)
.BR XmScrolledWindow (3)
.BR XmSelectionBox (3)
.BR XmSeparator (3)
.BR XmSeparatorGCacheObj (3)
.BR XmSeparatorGadget (3)
.BR XmSpinBox (3)
.BR XmTearOffButton (3)
.BR XmText (3)
.BR XmTextField (3)
.BR XmToggleButton (3)
.BR XmToggleButtonGCacheObj (3)
.BR XmToggleButtonGadget (3)
.BR XmVendorShellExt (3)
.BR XmWorld (3)
.RE
.PP
.BR "Xt Widgets":
.RS
.PP
.BR ApplicationShell (3)
.BR Composite (3)
.BR Core (3)
.BR Object (3)
.BR OverrideShell (3)
.BR Shell (3)
.BR TopLevelShell (3)
.BR TransientShell (3)
.BR WmShell (3)
.BR Rect (3)
.BR UnNamedObj (3)
.BR Constraint (3)
.BR VendorShell (3)
.RE
.PP
.BR "File Formats":
.RS
.PP
.BR mwmrc (5)
.RE
.PP
.BR "Utility Functions":
.RS
.PP
.BR XmClipboard (3)
.BR LessTifInternals (3)
.RE
.PP
.BR "Internet Resources":
.RS
.PP
The LessTif home page: http://www.lesstif.org
.PP
The Free Software Foundation (FSF) home page: http://www.gnu.org
.PP
The OpenGroup (owners of OSF/Motif\(rg and the X Window System)
home page: http://www.opengroup.org
.RE
