.\"
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/clients/mwm.1,v 1.7 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Ray Dassen <jdassen@debian.org>.
.\" Copyright (C) 1999-2002 LessTif Development Team
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License with
.\" your Debian GNU/Linux system, in /usr/doc/copyright/GPL, or with the
.\" dpkg source package as the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH MWM 1x "MARCH 2002" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
mwm \- The M*tif Window Manager
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mwm
.B [\-toolkitoption ...]
.B [\-debug]
.B [\-xrm 
.I resourcestring 
.B ]
.B [\-multiscreen]
.I [\-name 
.I name 
.B ]
.B [\-screens 
.I "[name [name [...]]" 
.B ]
.B [\-version] [-V]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mwm
is a window manager that adheres largely to the Motif mwm specification.
.SH OPTIONS
In addition to the standard X Toolkit command line options (see
.BR X (1)),
.BR mwm
accepts the following options:
.TP 5
.BI "\-xrm " resourcestring
Set resource
.TP 5
.BI "\-display "display
Specifies display to be used
.TP 5
.B -debug
Enable debugging. This includes synchronous sending of requests to the X
server.
.TP 5
.B -multiscreen
Use multiple screens.
.TP 5
.BI "\-name "name
Make mwm retrieve its resources using the given name
.TP 5
.BI "\-screens " "[name [name [...]]"
Manage multiple screens. 
.I Not yet supported
.TP 5
.B -version
Print version information to stderr.

.SH FILES
.I /etc/X11/mwm/system.mwmrc
.RS
The system wide configuration file. See
.BR mwmrc (5)
for further details.
.RE
.I ~/.mwmrc
.RS
Per user configuration file. See
.BR mwmrc (5)
for further details.
.SH X Resources
.BR mwm
supports a number of resources. It departs from the Motif mwm specification
in that all window decorations have separate resources.

The resources are documented in the app defaults file for
.BR mwm ,
.I usr/X11R6/lib/X11/app-defaults/Mwm .

.SH COPYING
See the file COPYING which accompanies this distribution of mwm.

.SH AUTHORS
The LessTif project,
.BR http://www.lesstif.org/ .
This manpage was put together by Ray Dassen
.IR <jdassen@debian.org> .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR lesstif (1)
.BR X (1),
.BR mwmrc (5)
