.\"
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/clients/mwmrc.5,v 1.2 2001/07/16 08:39:47 amai Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Ray Dassen <jdassen@debian.org>.
.\" Copyright (C) 1999-2001 LessTif Development Team
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License with
.\" your Debian GNU/Linux system, in /usr/doc/copyright/GPL, or with the
.\" dpkg source package as the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH MWMRC 5x "JULY 2001" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
mwmrc \- The M*tif Window Manager configuration file

.SH DESCRIPTION
The LessTif window manager
.B mwm
supports both a global configuration file
.B /etc/X11/mwm/system.mwmrc
and a per-user configation file
.BR ~/.mwmrc .

.SH STRUCTURE
Each mwm configuration file consist of blocks of bindings.
Each block consists of a block type keyword, a name and a set of entries
between curly braces (`{' and '}').

An exclamation mark (`!') introduces a comment. Comments extend to the end
of the line.

.SH Block types
There are three types of blocks:
.RS
.TP
Menu bindings
.TP 
Button bindings
.TP
Key bindings
.RE

.SH Menu bindings
Menu bindings are introduced by the
.B Menu
keyword.
The generic form of the entries is
.I label mnemonic accelerator function .
Both 
.I mnemonic 
and 
.I accelerator
may be empty.
For example:
.RS
"Foo bar"	_R	Alt<Key>F5	f.restore
.RE


.SH Button bindings

Button bindings are introduced by the
.B Buttons
keyword.
The entries each are
.I Button name Context Function .
For example:
.RS
<Btn3Down>	icon|frame	f.post_wmenu
.RE

.SH Key bindings
Key bindings are very similar to button bindings.
The entries each are
.I Key name Context Function .
For example:
.RS
Alt<Key>Tab	root|icon|window	f.next_key
.RE

.SH Label
A label is either a plain string, or a bitmap. Bitmaps are indicated as 
"@" followed by the filename.
For example:
.RS
mailer
@fortytwo.bmp
.RE

.SH Mnemonic
A mnemonic is an underscore ("_") followed by a single character.
For example:
.RS
_M
.RE

.SH Accelerator
An accelerator is a key name.

.SH Button name
A button name is 
.B "Btn"
followed by the number
.RB ( 1 .. 5 )
and an action
.RB ( Up ", " Down ", " Click ", " Click2 );
for example:
.RS 
Btn2Click
.RE

.SH Context 
A context is a single string consisting of bar (`|') separated object names 
.RB ( root ", " icon ", " menub ", " minimizeb ", " maximizeb
.RB ", " window ", " title ", " frame ", " border );
for example:
.RS
icon|title
.RE

.SH Function
A function is a string starting with "f.". The functions are:
.BR f.beep ", "
.BR f.circle_down ", "
.BR f.circle_up ", "
.BR f.desk ", "
.BR f.exec ", "
.BR f.focus_color ", "
.BR f.focus_key ", "
.BR f.goto_page ", "
.BR f.kill ", "
.BR f.lower ", "
.BR f.maximize ", "
.BR f.menu ", "
.BR f.minimize ", "
.BR f.move ", "
.BR f.next_cmap ", "
.BR f.next_key ", "
.BR f.nop ", "
.BR f.normalize ", "
.BR f.normalize_and_raise ", "
.BR f.pack_icons ", "
.BR f.pass_keys ", "
.BR f.post_wmenu ", "
.BR f.prev_cmap ", "
.BR f.prev_key ", "
.BR f.quit_mwm ", "
.BR f.raise ", "
.BR f.raise_lower ", "
.BR f.refresh ", "
.BR f.refresh_win ", "
.BR f.resize ", "
.BR f.restart ", "
.BR f.restore ", "
.BR f.restore_and_raise ", "
.BR f.screen ", "
.BR f.send_msg ", "
.BR f.separator ", "
.BR f.set_behavior ", "
.BR f.title ", "
.BR f.toggle_page ", "
.BR f.window_list "."

.SH EXAMPLE
For a complete example, check out
.B /etc/X11/mwm/system.mwmrc
or look at the
.B system.mwmrc
distributed with the LessTif sources.

.SH AUTHORS
.BR mwm
was written by the LessTif project,
.BR http://www.lesstif.org/ 
and others. This manpage was written by Ray Dassen 
.IR <jdassen@debian.org> .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mwm (1x)
