.\"
.\" $Header: /cvsroot/lesstif/lesstif/doc/lessdox/clients/xmbind.1,v 1.5 2009/04/29 12:23:30 paulgevers Exp $
.\"
.\" Written by Harald Albrecht (albrecht@igpm.rwth-aachen.de)
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\" Copyright (C) 1998-2000 LessTif Development Team
.\"
.\" This is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" This is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
.\" ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License with
.\" your Debian GNU/Linux system, in /usr/doc/copyright/GPL, or with the
.\" dpkg source package as the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free
.\" Software Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.\"
.TH XMBIND 1x "MARCH 1998" "LessTif Project" "LessTif Manuals"
.SH NAME
xmbind \- configures the virtual key bindings of LessTif applications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xmbind
.I [\-toolkitoption ...]
.B FILE
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B xmbind
application is a X Window System client that configures
the virtual key bindings of 
.B LessTif
applications. As every
.B LessTif
application loads either a set of predefinied virtual key
bindings or, if applicable, looks up the bindings in some well known places
(see
.BR VirtualBindings (5x)
) you need to use
.B xmbind
only when explicitly loading binding files or 
when you want to reset the bindings to their initial values (after you have
messed them up).
.P
If a file is specified, its contents are used as the virtual key bindings.
If no file name is given, or the file can't be found,
.B xmbind
looks for the file
.B .motifbind
in the user's home directory. If this all fails,
.B xmbind
loads the default virtual key bindings, as described
in
.BR VirtualBindings (5x).
.P
The return code is zero, if the
.B xmbind
client succeeds, otherwise it is non-zero.
.P
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.BI "\-display " display
Specifies the display to use.
.TP 5
.B --help
Displays a help summary and then exits.
.TP 5
.B --version
Outputs version information about
.B xmbind
and then exits.
.P
In addition,
all the usual X toolkit options may be used,
although they seldom may be of any use.
.SH FILE FORMAT
For a description of the
.BR VirtualBindings (5x)
format of binding files, refer to the man page of the
.BR VirtualBindings (5x).
.SH BUGS
This
.B xmbind
client does not feature more bugs than any other ISO 9000
quality software - but it is much cheaper.
Thus, the
.I specific feature rate
(that is bugs per currency unit) is very pleasant.

.SH Related Information
.BR VirtualBindings (5x)
.BR lesstif (1)
