.\"                                      Hey, EMACS: -*- nroff -*-
.\" Copyright 2014 Vincent Sanders
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this man page (the "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\"The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\"THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.Dd December 26, 2014
.Dt NETSURF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm netsurf
.Nd a small fast web browser
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm netsurf-gtk
.Op Ar options
.Op Ar url
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a lightweight, fast, standards-compliant web browser.
This man page only describes how to run the browser.
.Pp
The command line parameters override any options loaded from the user's
.Pa Choices
file.
.Pp
In addition to these parameters the standard GTK+ options may be passed.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl v
Enable verbose logging.
.It Fl -http_proxy
Boolean indicating if the http proxy is being used.
.It Fl -http_proxy_host
The http proxy host.
.It Fl -http_proxy_port
The http proxy port.
.It Fl -http_proxy_auth
The authentication scheme for the http proxy.
.It Fl -http_proxy_auth_user
The authentication schemes user.
.It Fl -http_proxy_auth_pass
The authentication schemes password.
.It Fl -font_size
The default font size to use.
.It Fl -font_min_size
The minimum font size to use.
.It Fl -font_sans
Family name of the sans serif font.
.It Fl -font_serif
Family name of the serif font.
.It Fl -font_mono
Family name of the monospace font.
.It Fl -font_cursive
Family name of the cursive font.
.It Fl -font_fantasy
Family name of the fantasy font.
.It Fl -accept_language
Languages to accept.
.It Fl -accept_charset
Character set to accept
.It Fl -memory_cache_size
Maximum memory cache size.
.It Fl -disc_cache_age
Maximum disc cache size.
.It Fl -block_advertisements
Boolean to enable ad blocking.
.It Fl -minimum_gif_delay
Minimum time between gif frames
.It Fl -send_referer
Boolean controlling whether referrer data should be sent
.It Fl -animate_images
Boolean controlling whether images should be animated.
.It Fl -expire_url
expire url
.It Fl -font_default
Default font.
.It Fl -ca_bundle
Certificate authority bundle path.
.It Fl -ca_path
Certificate authority path
.It Fl -cookie_file
cookie file
.It Fl -cookie_jar
cookie jar
.It Fl -homepage_url
homepage url
.It Fl -search_url_bar
search url bar
.It Fl -search_provider
search provider
.It Fl -url_suggestion
url suggestion
.It Fl -window_x
The X co-ordinate of the initial window.
.It Fl -window_y
The Y co-ordinate of the initial window.
.It Fl -window_width
The width of the initial window.
.It Fl -window_height
The height of the initial window.
.It Fl -window_screen_width
window screen width
.It Fl -window_screen_height
window screen height
.It Fl -toolbar_status_size
toolbar status size
.It Fl -scale
Initial scale factor.
.It Fl -incremental_reflow
Boolean controlling whether incremental reflow is performed.
.It Fl -min_reflow_period
Minimum time between incremental reflows
.It Fl -core_select_menu
core select menu
.It Fl -max_fetchers
max fetchers
.It Fl -max_fetchers_per_host
max fetchers per host
.It Fl -max_cached_fetch_handles
max cached fetch handles
.It Fl -suppress_curl_debug
suppress curl debug
.It Fl -target_blank
target blank
.It Fl -button_2_tab
button 2 tab
.It Fl -margin_top
margin top
.It Fl -margin_bottom
margin bottom
.It Fl -margin_left
margin left
.It Fl -margin_right
margin right
.It Fl -export_scale
export scale
.It Fl -suppress_images
suppress images
.It Fl -remove_backgrounds
remove backgrounds
.It Fl -enable_loosening
enable loosening
.It Fl -enable_PDF_compression
enable PDF compression
.It Fl -enable_PDF_password
enable_PDF_password
.It Fl -gui_colour_bg_1
gui colour bg_1
.It Fl -gui_colour_fg_1
gui colour fg_1
.It Fl -gui_colour_fg_2
gui colour fg_2
.It Fl -sys_colour_ActiveBorder
Override CSS sys_colour_ActiveBorder colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ActiveCaption
Override CSS sys_colour_ActiveCaption colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_AppWorkspace
Override CSS sys_colour_AppWorkspace colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_Background
Override CSS sys_colour_Background colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ButtonFace
Override CSS sys_colour_ButtonFace colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ButtonHighlight
Override CSS sys_colour_ButtonHighlight colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ButtonShadow
Override CSS sys_colour_ButtonShadow colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ButtonText
Override CSS sys_colour_ButtonText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_CaptionText
Override CSS sys_colour_CaptionText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_GrayText
Override CSS sys_colour_GrayText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_Highlight
Override CSS sys_colour_Highlight colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_HighlightText
Override CSS sys_colour_HighlightText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_InactiveBorder
Override CSS sys_colour_InactiveBorder colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_InactiveCaption
Override CSS sys_colour_InactiveCaption colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_InactiveCaptionText
Override CSS sys_colour_InactiveCaptionText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_InfoBackground
Override CSS sys_colour_InfoBackground colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_InfoText
Override CSS sys_colour_InfoText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_Menu
Override CSS sys_colour_Menu colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_MenuText
Override CSS sys_colour_MenuText colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_Scrollbar
Override CSS sys_colour_Scrollbar colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ThreeDDarkShadow
Override CSS sys_colour_ThreeDDarkShadow colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ThreeDFace
Override CSS sys_colour_ThreeDFace colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ThreeDHighlight
Override CSS sys_colour_ThreeDHighlight colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ThreeDLightShadow
Override CSS sys_colour_ThreeDLightShadow colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_ThreeDShadow
Override CSS sys_colour_ThreeDShadow colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_Window
Override CSS sys_colour_Window colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_WindowFrame
Override CSS sys_colour_WindowFrame colour.
.It Fl -sys_colour_WindowText
Override CSS sys_colour_WindowText colour.
.It Fl -render_resample
render resample
.It Fl -downloads_clear
downloads clear
.It Fl -request_overwrite
request overwrite
.It Fl -downloads_directory
downloads directory
.It Fl -url_file
url file
.It Fl -show_single_tab
Force tabs to always be show.
.It Fl -button_type
button type
.It Fl -disable_popups
disable popups
.It Fl -disable_plugins
disable plugins
.It Fl -history_age
history age
.It Fl -hover_urls
hover urls
.It Fl -focus_new
focus new
.It Fl -new_blank
new blank
.It Fl -hotlist_path
hotlist path
.It Fl -source_tab
source tab
.It Fl -current_theme
current theme
.Sh FILES
.Bl -item -width HOMEconfignetsurfChoicesxxxx
.It
.Pa $HOME/.config/netsurf/Choices
.It
.Pa $HOME/.config/netsurf/Hotlist
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gtk-options 7
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%D December 3, 2014
.%I Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group
.%T HTML Living Standard
.%U https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%D June 7, 2011
.%I World Wide Web Consortium
.%T Cascading Style Sheets Level 2 Revision 1 (CSS 2.1) Specification
.%U http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS21/
.Re
.Pp
.Rs
.%D December 17, 2014
.%I Web Hypertext Application Technology Working Group
.%T Document Object Model Living Standard
.%U https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
Authorship information for
.Nm
is available at the project homepage,
.Lk http://www.netsurf-browser.org/
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Vincent Sanders Aq Mt vince@netsurf-browser.org
