\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename gxmessage.info
@settitle Gxmessage Manual
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual documents version 2.12.1 of gxmessage.

Copyright @copyright{} 2009 Timothy Richard Musson

@quotation
  Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
  under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
  or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
  with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
  Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
  Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Frontends
@direntry
* Gxmessage: (gxmessage).       Scriptable pop-up dialogs.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Gxmessage Manual
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Gxmessage Manual

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::                     A short description of the program.
* Invoking gxmessage::           How to run @command{gxmessage}.
* Compatibility::                Notes on @command{xmessage} compatibility.
* Example Usage::                Some examples of @command{gxmessage} in action.
* GTK Stock Items::              A list of GTK's stock buttons.
* GTK Resource Files::           Tweaking the default appearance.
* Reporting Bugs::               How to report bugs and get help.
* GNU Free Documentation License::  Copying and sharing this manual.
@end menu


@node Overview
@chapter Overview
Gxmessage is a GTK-based clone of xmessage.

Gxmessage pops up a dialog window, displays a given message or question, then
waits for the user's response. That response is returned as the program's exit
code. Because gxmessage is a drop-in alternative to xmessage, gxmessage accepts
any option xmessage would, and returns the same exit codes.


@node Invoking gxmessage
@chapter Invoking gxmessage

@majorheading Invocation

The simplest use of gxmessage requires only a message to display. The message
can be obtained from the command line, from a file, or from @file{stdin}. The
basic syntax is:

@example
gxmessage [OPTION] @var{message}@dots{}
gxmessage [OPTION] -file @var{FILENAME}
gxmessage [OPTION] -file -
@end example

The @command{gxmessage} command accepts any option @command{xmessage} would,
although some (such as @option{-bw} and @option{-xrm}) are silently ignored.
Options supported by gxmessage are as follows:

@table @option
@item -bg @var{COLOR}
Sets the background color of the message to @var{COLOR}.
Examples: @code{red}, @code{"#c90"}, @code{"#446a7e"}.

@item -borderless
Opens the gxmessage window without the usual window frame. This option is not
backwards compatible with xmessage.

@item -buttons @var{BUTTONLIST}
Defines the buttons to be created. @var{BUTTONLIST} is a comma-separated list
of @var{LABEL:VALUE} pairs, one for each button. The @var{LABEL} is the text
that appears on the button. The @var{VALUE} (0..255) is the  code the program
will exit with if that button is pressed. Commas and colons can be escaped
using backslashes (\). As  well as  ordinary  text,  the @var{LABEL} can
specify a GTK "stock" button, like @code{GTK_STOCK_CANCEL}, or it can include
an underscore (@code{_}) to specify  a  keyboard  accelerator. If @var{VALUE}s
are omitted, they default to 101, 102, 103, etc., in order. If no
@option{-buttons} option is given, @var{BUTTONLIST} defaults to the string
@code{okay:0}. As the following examples show, it's not as tricky as it sounds!

@example
gxmessage -buttons Foo:42,Bar:63 Example
echo $?

gxmessage -buttons _Foo,_Bar Example
echo $?

gxmessage Example
echo $?

gxmessage -buttons GTK_STOCK_OK:0 Example
echo $?

gxmessage -buttons "Hello\, world" Example
@end example

@item -center
Opens the gxmessage window in the middle of the screen.

@item -default @var{LABEL}
Opens the gxmessage window with input focused on the specified button.
@var{LABEL} is one of the @var{LABEL}s in @var{BUTTONLIST} (see
@option{-buttons}, above).

@item -display @var{DISPLAY}
Specifies the X display to use.

@item -encoding @var{CHARSET}
Specifies the encoding of the message text. By default, the message text is
assumed to match the encoding of the current locale. This option is not
backwards compatible with xmessage.

@item -entry
Adds a text entry box to the gxmessage window. When the window closes, any text
in the entry box will be copied to @file{stdout}. This option  is not
compatible with xmessage and cannot be used at the same time as the
@option{-print} option.

@item -entrytext @var{TEXT}
Same as @option{-entry}, but sets the default entry box contents to @var{TEXT}.
This option is not backwards compatible with xmessage.

@item -fg @var{COLOR}
Sets the message text color to @var{COLOR}.

@item -file @var{FILENAME}
Causes the named  file  to be used as the message source. If a dash (-) is used
in place of @var{FILENAME}, the message will be read from @file{stdin}.

@item -fn | -font @var{FONT}
Specifies the message font, using GTK2's font specification system. For
example, @option{-font "serif italic 14"}. (GTK's font system is not compatible
with xmessage. See the Compatibility section of this manual for a workaround.)

@item -geometry @var{GEOMETRY}
Sets the window's size. The position component of the geometry string is
ignored by gxmessage due to limitations in GTK. Example: @option{-geometry
400x200}

@item -help
Displays basic usage information then exits.

@item -iconic
Opens the gxmessage window in its iconized (minimized) state.

@item -name @var{NAME}
Sets the gxmessage window's name to @var{NAME}.

@item -nearmouse
Opens the gxmessage window near the mouse pointer.

@item -nofocus
Prevents the gxmessage window from receiving focus when it opens. This option
is not backwards compatible with xmessage.

@item -print
Writes the @var{LABEL} of the selected button to @file{stdout}.

@item -timeout @var{SECONDS}
Automatically closes the gxmessage window with an exit code of 0 if no button
is pressed within @var{SECONDS} seconds. (The @option{-entry} and
@option{-entrytext} options cause @option{-timeout} to be ignored.)

@item -title @var{TITLE}
Sets the gxmessage window's title to @var{TITLE}.

@item -version
Displays the program's version number and Copyright details, then exits. This
option is not backwards compatible with xmessage.

@item -wrap
Causes lines to wrap rather than exceed the width of the window.  This option
is not backwards compatible with xmessage.

@end table

@majorheading Exit Codes

If a button is pressed, the program returns the @var{VALUE} assigned to that
button. The default "okay" button returns 0.

If a timeout event occurs, the program returns 0.

If an error occurs, or if the window is closed without a button-press or
timeout event, the program exits with code 1.

Pressing the @key{ESC} key also causes the program to exit with code 1.


@node Compatibility
@chapter Compatibility

@majorheading Compatibility with @command{xmessage}

This section contains notes about writing shell scripts that work with both
gxmessage and xmessage.

The following bash snippet shows how to fall back to @command{xmessage} if
@command{gxmessage} is not available:

@example
XMESSAGE=$(which gxmessage) || XMESSAGE=xmessage
$XMESSAGE "hello, world"
@end example

Gxmessage and xmessage use a different system for specifying fonts. If you need
to specify a font, check which program you're using:

@example
font="monospace 14"
[ "$XMESSAGE" = xmessage ] && font="fixed"
$XMESSAGE $@{font:+-fn "$font"@} "hello, world"
@end example

Like most GTK programs, gxmessage allows double-dashed options---for example,
@option{--help}. For compatibility with xmessage, however, options must use
single dashes.

The following options are specific to gxmessage and will not work with
xmessage:
@option{-borderless},
@option{-encoding},
@option{-entry},
@option{-entrytext},
@option{-nofocus},
@option{-version},
@option{-wrap},
@option{-h},
and
@option{-?}.

@majorheading Compatibility with @command{gxmessage}

Debian based distributions incorrectly package gxmessage under the title
"gmessage", and make @file{/usr/bin/gmessage} a link to @command{gxmessage}.
Please use @command{gxmessage} and not @command{gmessage} in your shell
scripts, otherwise your scripts will be needlessly Debian specific.


@node Example Usage
@chapter Example Usage

The following example is a Nautilus script. If you're using GNOME, this file
adds a word-count option to your desktop's right-click menu. Note how this
example falls back to @command{xmessage} if @command{gxmessage} is not
available.

@example
#! /bin/bash
# Filename: ~/.gnome2/nautilus-scripts/word-count

PROG=$(basename $0)

if [ "$1" = '-h' ]; then
  echo "Usage: $PROG FILE..."
  exit 0
fi

XMESSAGE=$(which gxmessage) || XMESSAGE=xmessage

font=monospace
[ "$XMESSAGE" = xmessage ] && font=fixed

[ "$#" -ge 1 ] &&
  wc "$@@" 2>&1 | $XMESSAGE $@{font:+-fn "$font"@}     \
                         -title "$PROG"             \
                         -nearmouse                 \
                         -buttons GTK_STOCK_CLOSE:0 \
                         -default GTK_STOCK_CLOSE   \
                         -file -
@end example

Here's a bash script named @command{gxview} that uses gxmessage as a fast
desktop text viewer (especially nice for my ancient slow computer!). If using
GNOME, you can make @command{gxview} the default text viewer by right-clicking
on any text file, selecting @samp{Properties}, then @samp{Open With}.

@example
#! /bin/bash
# Filename: /usr/local/bin/gxview

## 
## Usage: %PROG% [OPTIONS] [FILE]
## 
##   Uses gxmessage to view a file, with options to edit or print
## 
## Options:
##   -c          Center
##   -f COLOR    Foreground color
##   -b COLOR    Background color
##   -s FONT     Message font or style (e.g. 'serif 14')
##   -w          Wrap long lines
##   -h          Help
## 

PROG=$(basename $0)
EX_USAGE=64
XMESSAGE=$@{XMESSAGE:-$(which gxmessage)@} || XMESSAGE=xmessage
GEDIT=gedit

MSG_TITLE=$PROG
MSG_FG=
MSG_BG=
MSG_GEOM=800x600
MSG_FONT=monospace

[ "$XMESSAGE" = xmessage ] && MSG_FONT=

invocationError ()
@{
  echo "Try '$PROG -h'" >&2
  exit $EX_USAGE
@}

showUsage ()
@{
  sed -n '/^##/s/^## //p' $0 | sed -e "s#%PROG%#$@{PROG@}#g"
  exit
@}

while getopts 'chf:b:s:w' Option
do
  case $Option in
  c) center=1 ;;
  f) MSG_FG=$OPTARG ;;
  b) MSG_BG=$OPTARG ;;
  s) MSG_FONT=$OPTARG ;;
  w) wrap=1 ;;
  h) showUsage ;;
  *) invocationError ;;
  esac
done
shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
[ "$#" -gt 1 ] && invocationError

filename=$@{1:--@}

if [ "$filename" = '-' ]; then
  buttons=GTK_STOCK_CLOSE:103
else
  MSG_TITLE="$MSG_TITLE: $filename"
  buttons=GTK_STOCK_EDIT:101,GTK_STOCK_PRINT:102,GTK_STOCK_CLOSE:103
fi

$XMESSAGE -title "$MSG_TITLE"                \
          $@{MSG_GEOM:+-geometry "$MSG_GEOM"@} \
          $@{center:+-center@}                 \
          $@{MSG_FONT:+-font "$MSG_FONT"@}     \
          $@{MSG_FG:+-fg "$MSG_FG"@}           \
          $@{MSG_BG:+-bg "$MSG_BG"@}           \
          $@{wrap:+-wrap@}                     \
          -buttons "$buttons"                \
          -default GTK_STOCK_CLOSE           \
          -file "$filename"

action=$?
if [ "$action" -eq 101 ]; then
  $GEDIT "$filename"
elif [ "$action" -eq 102 ]; then
  enscript -G "$filename" | lpr
fi

exit 0
@end example

More examples can be found in the @file{examples} directory shipped with the
gxmessage source code.


@node GTK Stock Items
@chapter GTK Stock Items
The following GTK stock items can be used with gxmessage's @option{-buttons}
option:

@example
GTK_STOCK_ABOUT
GTK_STOCK_ADD
GTK_STOCK_APPLY
GTK_STOCK_BOLD
GTK_STOCK_CANCEL
GTK_STOCK_CAPS_LOCK_WARNING
GTK_STOCK_CDROM
GTK_STOCK_CLEAR
GTK_STOCK_CLOSE
GTK_STOCK_COLOR_PICKER
GTK_STOCK_CONVERT
GTK_STOCK_CONNECT
GTK_STOCK_COPY
GTK_STOCK_CUT
GTK_STOCK_DELETE
GTK_STOCK_DIALOG_AUTHENTICATION
GTK_STOCK_DIALOG_ERROR
GTK_STOCK_DIALOG_INFO
GTK_STOCK_DIALOG_QUESTION
GTK_STOCK_DIALOG_WARNING
GTK_STOCK_DIRECTORY
GTK_STOCK_DISCARD
GTK_STOCK_DISCONNECT
GTK_STOCK_DND
GTK_STOCK_DND_MULTIPLE
GTK_STOCK_EDIT
GTK_STOCK_EXECUTE
GTK_STOCK_FILE
GTK_STOCK_FIND
GTK_STOCK_FIND_AND_REPLACE
GTK_STOCK_FLOPPY
GTK_STOCK_FULLSCREEN
GTK_STOCK_GOTO_BOTTOM
GTK_STOCK_GOTO_FIRST
GTK_STOCK_GOTO_LAST
GTK_STOCK_GOTO_TOP
GTK_STOCK_GO_BACK
GTK_STOCK_GO_DOWN
GTK_STOCK_GO_FORWARD
GTK_STOCK_GO_UP
GTK_STOCK_HARDDISK
GTK_STOCK_HELP
GTK_STOCK_HOME
GTK_STOCK_INDENT
GTK_STOCK_INDEX
GTK_STOCK_INFO
GTK_STOCK_ITALIC
GTK_STOCK_JUMP_TO
GTK_STOCK_JUSTIFY_CENTER
GTK_STOCK_JUSTIFY_FILL
GTK_STOCK_JUSTIFY_LEFT
GTK_STOCK_JUSTIFY_RIGHT
GTK_STOCK_LEAVE_FULLSCREEN
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_FORWARD
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_NEXT
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_PAUSE
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_PLAY
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_PREVIOUS
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_RECORD
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_REWIND
GTK_STOCK_MEDIA_STOP
GTK_STOCK_MISSING_IMAGE
GTK_STOCK_NETWORK
GTK_STOCK_NEW
GTK_STOCK_NO
GTK_STOCK_OK
GTK_STOCK_OPEN
GTK_STOCK_ORIENTATION_LANDSCAPE
GTK_STOCK_ORIENTATION_PORTRAIT
GTK_STOCK_ORIENTATION_REVERSE_LANDSCAPE
GTK_STOCK_ORIENTATION_REVERSE_PORTRAIT
GTK_STOCK_PAGE_SETUP
GTK_STOCK_PASTE
GTK_STOCK_PREFERENCES
GTK_STOCK_PRINT
GTK_STOCK_PRINT_ERROR
GTK_STOCK_PRINT_PAUSED
GTK_STOCK_PRINT_PREVIEW
GTK_STOCK_PRINT_REPORT
GTK_STOCK_PRINT_WARNING
GTK_STOCK_PROPERTIES
GTK_STOCK_QUIT
GTK_STOCK_REDO
GTK_STOCK_REFRESH
GTK_STOCK_REMOVE
GTK_STOCK_REVERT_TO_SAVED
GTK_STOCK_SAVE
GTK_STOCK_SAVE_AS
GTK_STOCK_SELECT_ALL
GTK_STOCK_SELECT_COLOR
GTK_STOCK_SELECT_FONT
GTK_STOCK_SORT_ASCENDING
GTK_STOCK_SORT_DESCENDING
GTK_STOCK_SPELL_CHECK
GTK_STOCK_STOP
GTK_STOCK_STRIKETHROUGH
GTK_STOCK_UNDELETE
GTK_STOCK_UNDERLINE
GTK_STOCK_UNDO
GTK_STOCK_UNINDENT
GTK_STOCK_YES
GTK_STOCK_ZOOM_100
GTK_STOCK_ZOOM_FIT
GTK_STOCK_ZOOM_IN
GTK_STOCK_ZOOM_OUT
@end example


@node GTK Resource Files
@chapter GTK Resource Files
The program's default appearance can be adjusted using GTK resource files. The
main text display widget is named @code{gxmessage-textview}. The text entry
widget is named @code{gxmessage-entry}.

@example
# This file's name is ~/.gtkrc-2.0

style "gxmsg" @{
    text[NORMAL]   = "#cc9900"
    base[NORMAL]   = "#660000"
    text[SELECTED] = "#660000"
    base[SELECTED] = "#cc9900"
    font_name      = "monospace"
@}
widget "*.gxmessage-textview" style  "gxmsg"
widget "*.gxmessage-entry"    style  "gxmsg"
@end example


@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs

If you have a problem or discover a bug, please send an email to Tim Musson,
@email{trmusson@@gmail.com}.

The most recent version of gxmessage can be found at:

@uref{http://homepages.ihug.co.nz/~trmusson/programs.html}


@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi


@bye

